<doc id="file22688796" filename="20141070.txt" parent_folder="upload">

* A Distributed Proofreaders Canada Ebook *

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the ebook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the ebook. If either of these conditions applies, please
check with an FP administrator before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be
under copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada,
check your country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER
COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD
OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

Title: The Old Man and the Sea
Author: Hemingway, Ernest (1899-1961)
Date of first publication: 1952
Edition used as base for this ebook:
   New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1952
Date first posted: 21 May 2012
Date last updated: October 14, 2014
Faded Page ebook#20141070

This ebook was produced by Al Haines






THE OLD MAN

AND

THE SEA




ERNEST HEMINGWAY




CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, NEW YORK

1952




COPYRIGHT, 1952, BY

ERNEST HEMINGWAY


Printed in the United States of America


_All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form without the permission of Charles Scribner's Sons_




TO CHARLIE SCRIBNER

AND

TO MAX PERKINS




THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA




He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he
had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish.  In the first
forty days a boy had been with him.  But after forty days without a
fish the boy's parents had told him that the old man was now definitely
and finally _salao_, which is the worst form of unlucky, and the boy
had gone at their orders in another boat which caught three good fish
the first week.  It made the boy sad to see the old man come in each
day with his skiff empty and he always went down to help him carry
either the coiled lines or the gaff and harpoon and the sail that was
furled around the mast.  The sail was patched with flour sacks and,
furled, it looked like the flag of permanent defeat.

The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the back of his
neck.  The brown blotches of the benevolent skin cancer the sun brings
from its reflection on the tropic sea were on his cheeks.  The blotches
ran well down the sides of his face and his hands had the deep-creased
scars from handling heavy fish on the cords.  But none of these scars
were fresh.  They were as old as erosions in a fishless desert.

Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same
color as the sea and were cheerful and undefeated.

"Santiago," the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the
skiff was hauled up.  "I could go with you again.  We've made some
money."

The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy loved him.

"No," the old man said.  "You're with a lucky boat.  Stay with them."

"But remember how you went eighty-seven days without fish and then we
caught big ones every day for three weeks."

"I remember," the old man said.  "I know you did not leave me because
you doubted."

"It was papa made me leave.  I am a boy and I must obey him."

"I know," the old man said.  "It is quite normal."

"He hasn't much faith."

"No," the old man said.  "But we have.  Haven't we?"

"Yes," the boy said.  "Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then
we'll take the stuff home."

"Why not?" the old man said.  "Between fishermen."

They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen made fun of the old
man and he was not angry.  Others, of the older fishermen, looked at
him and were sad.  But they did not show it and they spoke politely
about the current and the depths they had drifted their lines at and
the steady good weather and of what they had seen.  The successful
fishermen of that day were already in and had butchered their marlin
out and carried them laid full length across two planks, with two men
staggering at the end of each plank, to the fish house where they
waited for the ice truck to carry them to the market in Havana.  Those
who had caught sharks had taken them to the shark factory on the other
side of the cove where they were hoisted on a block and tackle, their
livers removed, their fins cut off and their hides skinned out and
their flesh cut into strips for salting.

When the wind was in the east a smell came across the harbour from the
shark factory; but today there was only the faint edge of the odour
because the wind had backed into the north and then dropped off and it
was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace.

"Santiago," the boy said.

"Yes," the old man said.  He was holding his glass and thinking of many
years ago.

"Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow?"

"No.  Go and play baseball.  I can still row and Rogelio will throw the
net."

"I would like to go.  If I cannot fish with you, I would like to serve
in some way."

"You bought me a beer," the old man said.  "You are already a man."

"How old was I when you first took me in a boat?"

"Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green
and he nearly tore the boat to pieces.  Can you remember?"

"I can remember the tail slapping and banging and the thwart breaking
and the noise of the clubbing.  I can remember you throwing me into the
bow where the wet coiled lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver
and the noise of you clubbing him like chopping a tree down and the
sweet blood smell all over me."

"Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you?"

"I remember everything from when we first went together."

The old man looked at him with his sun-burned, confident loving eyes.

"If you were my boy I'd take you out and gamble," he said.  "But you
are your father's and your mother's and you are in a lucky boat."

"May I get the sardines?  I know where I can get four baits too."

"I have mine left from today.  I put them in salt in the box."

"Let me get four fresh ones."

"One," the old man said.  His hope and his confidence had never gone.
But now they were freshening as when the breeze rises.

"Two," the boy said.

"Two," the old man agreed.  "You didn't steal them?"

"I would," the boy said.  "But I bought these."

"Thank you," the old man said.  He was too simple to wonder when he had
attained humility.  But he knew he had attained it and he knew it was
not disgraceful and it carried no loss of true pride.

"Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this current," he said.

"Where are you going?" the boy asked.

"Far out to come in when the wind shifts.  I want to be out before it
is light."

"I'll try to get him to work far out," the boy said.  "Then if you hook
something truly big we can come to your aid."

"He does not like to work too far out."

"No," the boy said.  "But I will see something that he cannot see such
as a bird working and get him to come out after dolphin."

"Are his eyes that bad?"

"He is almost blind."

"It is strange," the old man said.  "He never went turtle-ing.  That is
what kills the eyes."

"But you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito Coast and your eyes
are good."

"I am a strange old man."

"But are you strong enough now for a truly big fish?"

"I think so.  And there are many tricks."

"Let us take the stuff home," the boy said.  "So I can get the cast net
and go after the sardines."

They picked up the gear from the boat.  The old man carried the mast on
his shoulder and the boy carried the wooden box with the coiled,
hard-braided brown lines, the gaff and the harpoon with its shaft.  The
box with the baits was under the stern of the skiff along with the club
that was used to subdue the big fish when they were brought alongside.
No one would steal from the old man but it was better to take the sail
and the heavy lines home as the dew was bad for them and, though he was
quite sure no local people would steal from him, the old man thought
that a gaff and a harpoon were needless temptations to leave in a boat.

They walked up the road together to the old man's shack and went in
through its open door.  The old man leaned the mast with its wrapped
sail against the wall and the boy put the box and the other gear beside
it.  The mast was nearly as long as the one room of the shack.  The
shack was made of the tough bud-shields of the royal palm which are
called _guano_ and in it there was a bed, a table, one chair, and a
place on the dirt floor to cook with charcoal.  On the brown walls of
the flattened, overlapping leaves of the sturdy fibered _guano_ there
was a picture in color of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and another of the
Virgin of Cobre.  These were relics of his wife.  Once there had been a
tinted photograph of his wife on the wall but he had taken it down
because it made him too lonely to see it and it was on the shelf in the
corner under his clean shirt.

"What do you have to eat?" the boy asked.

"A pot of yellow rice with fish.  Do you want some?"

"No.  I will eat at home.  Do you want me to make the fire?"

"No.  I will make it later on.  Or I may eat the rice cold."

"May I take the cast net?"

"Of course."

There was no cast net and the boy remembered when they had sold it.
But they went through this fiction every day.  There was no pot of
yellow rice and fish and the boy knew this too.

"Eighty-five is a lucky number," the old man said.  "How would you like
to see me bring one in that dressed out over a thousand pounds?"

"I'll get the cast net and go for sardines.  Will you sit in the sun in
the doorway?"

"Yes.  I have yesterday's paper and I will read the baseball."

The boy did not know whether yesterday's paper was a fiction too.  But
the old man brought it out from under the bed.

"Perico gave it to me at the _bodega_," he explained.

"I'll be back when I have the sardines.  I'll keep yours and mine
together on ice and we can share them in the morning.  When I come back
you can tell me about the baseball."

"The Yankees cannot lose."

"But I fear the Indians of Cleveland."

"Have faith in the Yankees my son.  Think of the great DiMaggio."

"I fear both the Tigers of Detroit and the Indians of Cleveland."

"Be careful or you will fear even the Reds of Cincinnati and the White
Sox of Chicago."

"You study it and tell me when I come back."

"Do you think we should buy a terminal of the lottery with an
eighty-five?  Tomorrow is the eighty-fifth day."

"We can do that," the boy said.  "But what about the eighty-seven of
your great record?"

"It could not happen twice.  Do you think you can find an eighty-five?"

"I can order one."

"One sheet.  That's two dollars and a half.  Who can we borrow that
from?"

"That's easy.  I can always borrow two dollars and a half."

"I think perhaps I can too.  But I try not to borrow.  First you
borrow.  Then you beg."

"Keep warm old man," the boy said.  "Remember we are in September."

"The month when the great fish come," the old man said.  "Anyone can be
a fisherman in May."

"I go now for the sardines," the boy said.

When the boy came back the old man was asleep in the chair and the sun
was down.  The boy took the old army blanket off the bed and spread it
over the back of the chair and over the old man's shoulders.  They were
strange shoulders, still powerful although very old, and the neck was
still strong too and the creases did not show so much when the old man
was asleep and his head fallen forward.  His shirt had been patched so
many times that it was like the sail and the patches were faded to many
different shades by the sun.  The old man's head was very old though
and with his eyes closed there was no life in his face.  The newspaper
lay across his knees and the weight of his arm held it there in the
evening breeze.  He was barefooted.

The boy left him there and when he came back the old man was still
asleep.

"Wake up old man," the boy said and put his hand on one of the old
man's knees.

The old man opened his eyes and for a moment he was coming back from a
long way away.  Then he smiled.

"What have you got?" he asked.

"Supper," said the boy.  "We're going to have supper."

"I'm not very hungry."

"Come on and eat.  You can't fish and not eat."

"I have," the old man said getting up and taking the newspaper and
folding it.  Then he started to fold the blanket.

"Keep the blanket around you," the boy said.  "You'll not fish without
eating while I'm alive."

"Then live a long time and take care of yourself," the old man said.
"What are we eating?"

"Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some stew."

The boy had brought them in a two-decker metal container from the
Terrace.  The two sets of knives and forks and spoons were in his
pocket with a paper napkin wrapped around each set.

"Who gave this to you?"

"Martin.  The owner."

"I must thank him."

"I thanked him already," the boy said.  "You don't need to thank him."

"I'll give him the belly meat of a big fish," the old man said.  "Has
he done this for us more than once?"

"I think so."

"I must give him something more than the belly meat then.  He is very
thoughtful for us."

"He sent two beers."

"I like the beer in cans best."

"I know.  But this is in bottles, Hatuey beer, and I take back the
bottles."

"That's very kind of you," the old man said.  "Should we eat?"

"I've been asking you to," the boy told him gently.  "I have not wished
to open the container until you were ready."

"I'm ready now," the old man said.  "I only needed time to wash."

Where did you wash? the boy thought.  The village water supply was two
streets down the road.  I must have water here for him, the boy
thought, and soap and a good towel.  Why am I so thoughtless?  I must
get him another shirt and a jacket for the winter and some sort of
shoes and another blanket.

"Your stew is excellent," the old man said.

"Tell me about the baseball," the boy asked him.

"In the American League it is the Yankees as I said," the old man said
happily.

"They lost today," the boy told him.

"That means nothing.  The great DiMaggio is himself again."

"They have other men on the team."

"Naturally.  But he makes the difference.  In the other league, between
Brooklyn and Philadelphia I must take Brooklyn.  But then I think of
Dick Sisler and those great drives in the old park."

"There was nothing ever like them.  He hits the longest ball I have
ever seen."

"Do you remember when he used to come to the Terrace?  I wanted to take
him fishing but I was too timid to ask him.  Then I asked you to ask
him and you were too timid."

"I know.  It was a great mistake.  He might have gone with us.  Then we
would have that for all of our lives."

"I would like to take the great DiMaggio fishing," the old man said.
"They say his father was a fisherman.  Maybe he was as poor as we are
and would understand."

"The great Sisler's father was never poor and he, the father, was
playing in the big leagues when he was my age."

"When I was your age I was before the mast on a square rigged ship that
ran to Africa and I have seen lions on the beaches in the evening."

"I know.  You told me."

"Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?"

"Baseball I think," the boy said.  "Tell me about the great John J.
McGraw."  He said _Jota_ for J.

"He used to come to the Terrace sometimes too in the older days.  But
he was rough and harsh-spoken and difficult when he was drinking.  His
mind was on horses as well as baseball.  At least he carried lists of
horses at all times in his pocket and frequently spoke the names of
horses on the telephone."

"He was a great manager," the boy said.  "My father thinks he was the
greatest."

"Because he came here the most times," the old man said.  "If Durocher
had continued to come here each year your father would think him the
greatest manager."

"Who is the greatest manager, really, Luque or Mike Gonzalez?"

"I think they are equal."

"And the best fisherman is you."

"No.  I know others better."

"_Qué va_," the boy said.  "There are many good fishermen and some
great ones.  But there is only you."

"Thank you.  You make me happy.  I hope no fish will come along so
great that he will prove us wrong."

"There is no such fish if you are still strong as you say."

"I may not be as strong as I think," the old man said.  "But I know
many tricks and I have resolution."

"You ought to go to bed now so that you will be fresh in the morning.
I will take the things back to the Terrace."

"Good night then.  I will wake you in the morning."

"You're my alarm clock," the boy said.

"Age is my alarm clock," the old man said.  "Why do old men wake so
early?  Is it to have one longer day?"

"I don't know," the boy said.  "All I know is that young boys sleep
late and hard."

"I can remember it," the old man said.  "I'll waken you in time."

"I do not like for him to waken me.  It is as though I were inferior."

"I know."

"Sleep well, old man."

The boy went out.  They had eaten with no light on the table and the
old man took off his trousers and went to bed in the dark.  He rolled
his trousers up to make a pillow, putting the newspaper inside them.
He rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the other old newspapers
that covered the springs of the bed.

He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa when he was a
boy and the long golden beaches and the white beaches, so white they
hurt your eyes, and the high capes and the great brown mountains.  He
lived along that coast now every night and in his dreams he heard the
surf roar and saw the native boats come riding through it.  He smelled
the tar and oakum of the deck as he slept and he smelled the smell of
Africa that the land breeze brought at morning.

Usually when he smelled the land breeze he woke up and dressed to go
and wake the boy.  But tonight the smell of the land breeze came very
early and he knew it was too early in his dream and went on dreaming to
see the white peaks of the Islands rising from the sea and then he
dreamed of the different harbours and roadsteads of the Canary Islands.

He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of women, nor of great occurrences,
nor of great fish, nor fights, nor contests of strength, nor of his
wife.  He only dreamed of places now and of the lions on the beach.
They played like young cats in the dusk and he loved them as he loved
the boy.  He never dreamed about the boy.  He simply woke, looked out
the open door at the moon and unrolled his trousers and put them on.
He urinated outside the shack and then went up the road to wake the
boy.  He was shivering with the morning cold.  But he knew he would
shiver himself warm and that soon he would be rowing.

The door of the house where the boy lived was unlocked and he opened it
and walked in quietly with his bare feet.  The boy was asleep on a cot
in the first room and the old man could see him clearly with the light
that came in from the dying moon.  He took hold of one foot gently and
held it until the boy woke and turned and looked at him.  The old man
nodded and the boy took his trousers from the chair by the bed and,
sitting on the bed, pulled them on.

The old man went out the door and the boy came after him.  He was
sleepy and the old man put his arm across his shoulders and said, "I am
sorry."

"_Qué va_," the boy said.  "It is what a man must do."

They walked down the road to the old man's shack and all along the
road, in the dark, barefoot men were moving, carrying the masts of
their boats.

When they reached the old man's shack the boy took the rolls of line in
the basket and the harpoon and gaff and the old man carried the mast
with the furled sail on his shoulder.

"Do you want coffee?" the boy asked.

"We'll put the gear in the boat and then get some."

They had coffee from condensed milk cans at an early morning place that
served fishermen.

"How did you sleep old man?" the boy asked.  He was waking up now
although it was still hard for him to leave his sleep.

"Very well, Manolin," the old man said.  "I feel confident today."

"So do I," the boy said.  "Now I must get your sardines and mine and
your fresh baits.  He brings our gear himself.  He never wants anyone
to carry anything."

"We're different," the old man said.  "I let you carry things when you
were five years old."

"I know it," the boy said.  "I'll be right back.  Have another coffee.
We have credit here."

He walked off, bare-footed on the coral rocks, to the ice house where
the baits were stored.

The old man drank his coffee slowly.  It was all he would have all day
and he knew that he should take it.  For a long time now eating had
bored him and he never carried a lunch.  He had a bottle of water in
the bow of the skiff and that was all he needed for the day.

The boy was back now with the sardines and the two baits wrapped in a
newspaper and they went down the trail to the skiff, feeling the
pebbled sand under their feet, and lifted the skiff and slid her into
the water.

"Good luck old man."

"Good luck," the old man said.  He fitted the rope lashings of the oars
onto the thole pins and, leaning forward against the thrust of the
blades in the water, he began to row out of the harbour in the dark.
There were other boats from the other beaches going out to sea and the
old man heard the dip and push of their oars even though he could not
see them now the moon was below the hills.

Sometimes someone would speak in a boat.  But most of the boats were
silent except for the dip of the oars.  They spread apart after they
were out of the mouth of the harbour and each one headed for the part
of the ocean where he hoped to find fish.  The old man knew he was
going far out and he left the smell of the land behind and rowed out
into the clean early morning smell of the ocean.  He saw the
phosphorescence of the Gulf weed in the water as he rowed over the part
of the ocean that the fishermen called the great well because there was
a sudden deep of seven hundred fathoms where all sorts of fish
congregated because of the swirl the current made against the steep
walls of the floor of the ocean.  Here there were concentrations of
shrimp and bait fish and sometimes schools of squid in the deepest
holes and these rose close to the surface at night where all the
wandering fish fed on them.

In the dark the old man could feel the morning coming and as he rowed
he heard the trembling sound as flying fish left the water and the
hissing that their stiff set wings made as they soared away in the
darkness.  He was very fond of flying fish as they were his principal
friends on the ocean.  He was sorry for the birds, especially the small
delicate dark terns that were always flying and looking and almost
never finding, and he thought, "The birds have a harder life than we do
except for the robber birds and the heavy strong ones.  Why did they
make birds so delicate and fine as those sea swallows when the ocean
can be so cruel?  She is kind and very beautiful.  But she can be so
cruel and it comes so suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and
hunting, with their small sad voices are made too delicately for the
sea."

He always thought of the sea as _la mar_ which is what people call her
in Spanish when they love her.  Sometimes those who love her say bad
things of her but they are always said as though she were a woman.
Some of the younger fishermen, those who used buoys as floats for their
lines and had motorboats, bought when the shark livers had brought much
money, spoke of her as _el mar_ which is masculine.  They spoke of her
as a contestant or a place or even an enemy.  But the old man always
thought of her as feminine and as something that gave or withheld great
favours, and if she did wild or wicked things it was because she could
not help them.  The moon affects her as it does a woman, he thought.

He was rowing steadily and it was no effort for him since he kept well
within his speed and the surface of the ocean was flat except for the
occasional swirls of the current.  He was letting the current do a
third of the work and as it started to be light he saw he was already
further out than he had hoped to be at this hour.

I worked the deep wells for a week and did nothing, he thought.  Today
I'll work out where the schools of bonita and albacore are and maybe
there will be a big one with them.

Before it was really light he had his baits out and was drifting with
the current.  One bait was down forty fathoms.  The second was at
seventy-five and the third and fourth were down in the blue water at
one hundred and one hundred and twenty-five fathoms.  Each bait hung
head down with the shank of the hook inside the bait fish, tied and
sewed solid and all the projecting part of the hook, the curve and the
point, was covered with fresh sardines.  Each sardine was hooked
through both eyes so that they made a half-garland on the projecting
steel.  There was no part of the hook that a great fish could feel
which was not sweet smelling and good tasting.

The boy had given him two fresh small tunas, or albacores, which hung
on the two deepest lines like plummets and, on the others, he had a big
blue runner and a yellow jack that had been used before; but they were
in good condition still and had the excellent sardines to give them
scent and attractiveness.  Each line, as thick around as a big pencil,
was looped onto a green-sapped stick so that any pull or touch on the
bait would make the stick dip and each line had two forty-fathom coils
which could be made fast to the other spare coils so that, if it were
necessary, a fish could take out over three hundred fathoms of line.

Now the man watched the dip of the three sticks over the side of the
skiff and rowed gently to keep the lines straight up and down and at
their proper depths.  It was quite light and any moment now the sun
would rise.

The sun rose thinly from the sea and the old man could see the other
boats, low on the water and well in toward the shore, spread out across
the current.  Then the sun was brighter and the glare came on the water
and then, as it rose clear, the flat sea sent it back at his eyes so
that it hurt sharply and he rowed without looking into it.  He looked
down into the water and watched the lines that went straight down into
the dark of the water.  He kept them straighter than anyone did, so
that at each level in the darkness of the stream there would be a bait
waiting exactly where he wished it to be for any fish that swam there.
Others let them drift with the current and sometimes they were at sixty
fathoms when the fishermen thought they were at a hundred.

But, he thought, I keep them with precision.  Only I have no luck any
more.  But who knows?  Maybe today.  Every day is a new day.  It is
better to be lucky.  But I would rather be exact.  Then when luck comes
you are ready.

The sun was two hours higher now and it did not hurt his eyes so much
to look into the east.  There were only three boats in sight now and
they showed very low and far inshore.

All my life the early sun has hurt my eyes, he thought.  Yet they are
still good.  In the evening I can look straight into it without getting
the blackness.  It has more force in the evening too.  But in the
morning it is painful.

Just then he saw a man-of-war bird with his long black wings circling
in the sky ahead of him.  He made a quick drop, slanting down on his
back-swept wings, and then circled again.

"He's got something," the old man said aloud.  "He's not just looking."

He rowed slowly and steadily toward where the bird was circling.  He
did not hurry and he kept his lines straight up and down.  But he
crowded the current a little so that he was still fishing correctly
though faster than he would have fished if he was not trying to use the
bird.

The bird went higher in the air and circled again, his wings
motionless.  Then he dove suddenly and the old man saw flying fish
spurt out of the water and sail desperately over the surface.

"Dolphin," the old man said aloud.  "Big dolphin."

He shipped his oars and brought a small line from under the bow.  It
had a wire leader and a medium-sized hook and he baited it with one of
the sardines.  He let it go over the side and then made it fast to a
ring bolt in the stern.  Then he baited another line and left it coiled
in the shade of the bow.  He went back to rowing and to watching the
long-winged black bird who was working, now, low over the water.

As he watched the bird dipped again slanting his wings for the dive and
then swinging them wildly and ineffectually as he followed the flying
fish.  The old man could see the slight bulge in the water that the big
dolphin raised as they followed the escaping fish.  The dolphin were
cutting through the water below the flight of the fish and would be in
the water, driving at speed, when the fish dropped.  It is a big school
of dolphin, he thought.  They are wide spread and the flying fish have
little chance.  The bird has no chance.  The flying fish are too big
for him and they go too fast.

He watched the flying fish burst out again and again and the
ineffectual movements of the bird.  That school has gotten away from
me, he thought.  They are moving out too fast and too far.  But perhaps
I will pick up a stray and perhaps my big fish is around them.  My big
fish must be somewhere.

The clouds over the land now rose like mountains and the coast was only
a long green line with the gray blue hills behind it.  The water was a
dark blue now, so dark that it was almost purple.  As he looked down
into it he saw the red sifting of the plankton in the dark water and
the strange light the sun made now.  He watched his lines to see them
go straight down out of sight into the water and he was happy to see so
much plankton because it meant fish.  The strange light the sun made in
the water, now that the sun was higher, meant good weather and so did
the shape of the clouds over the land.  But the bird was almost out of
sight now and nothing showed on the surface of the water but some
patches of yellow, sun-bleached Sargasso weed and the purple,
formalized, iridescent, gelatinous bladder of a Portuguese man-of-war
floating close beside the boat.  It turned on its side and then righted
itself.  It floated cheerfully as a bubble with its long deadly purple
filaments trailing a yard behind it in the water.

"_Agua mala_," the man said.  "You whore."

From where he swung lightly against his oars he looked down into the
water and saw the tiny fish that were coloured like the trailing
filaments and swam between them and under the small shade the bubble
made as it drifted.  They were immune to its poison.  But men were not
and when some of the filaments would catch on a line and rest there
slimy and purple while the old man was working a fish, he would have
welts and sores on his arms and hands of the sort that poison ivy or
poison oak can give.  But these poisonings from the _agua mala_ came
quickly and struck like a whiplash.

The iridescent bubbles were beautiful.  But they were the falsest thing
in the sea and the old man loved to see the big sea turtles eating
them.  The turtles saw them, approached them from the front, then shut
their eyes so they were completely carapaced and ate them filaments and
all.  The old man loved to see the turtles eat them and he loved to
walk on them on the beach after a storm and hear them pop when he
stepped on them with the horny soles of his feet.

He loved green turtles and hawks-bills with their elegance and speed
and their great value and he had a friendly contempt for the huge,
stupid loggerheads, yellow in their armour-plating, strange in their
love-making, and happily eating the Portuguese men-of-war with their
eyes shut.

He had no mysticism about turtles although he had gone in turtle boats
for many years.  He was sorry for them all, even the great trunk backs
that were as long as the skiff and weighed a ton.  Most people are
heartless about turtles because a turtle's heart will beat for hours
after he has been cut up and butchered.  But the old man thought, I
have such a heart too and my feet and hands are like theirs.  He ate
the white eggs to give himself strength.  He ate them all through May
to be strong in September and October for the truly big fish.

He also drank a cup of shark liver oil each day from the big drum in
the shack where many of the fishermen kept their gear.  It was there
for all fishermen who wanted it.  Most fishermen hated the taste.  But
it was no worse than getting up at the hours that they rose and it was
very good against all colds and grippes and it was good for the eyes.

Now the old man looked up and saw that the bird was circling again.

"He's found fish," he said aloud.  No flying fish broke the surface and
there was no scattering of bait fish.  But as the old man watched, a
small tuna rose in the air, turned and dropped head first into the
water.  The tuna shone silver in the sun and after he had dropped back
into the water another and another rose and they were jumping in all
directions, churning the water and leaping in long jumps after the
bait.  They were circling it and driving it.

If they don't travel too fast I will get into them, the old man
thought, and he watched the school working the water white and the bird
now dropping and dipping into the bait fish that were forced to the
surface in their panic.

"The bird is a great help," the old man said.  Just then the stern line
came taut under his foot, where he had kept a loop of the line, and he
dropped his oars and felt the weight of the small tuna's shivering pull
as he held the line firm and commenced to haul it in.  The shivering
increased as he pulled in and he could see the blue back of the fish in
the water and the gold of his sides before he swung him over the side
and into the boat.  He lay in the stern in the sun, compact and bullet
shaped, his big, unintelligent eyes staring as he thumped his life out
against the planking of the boat with the quick shivering strokes of
his neat, fast-moving tail.  The old man hit him on the head for
kindness and kicked him, his body still shuddering, under the shade of
the stern.

"Albacore," he said aloud.  "He'll make a beautiful bait.  He'll weigh
ten pounds."

He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was
by himself.  He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he
had sung at night sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in
the smacks or in the turtle boats.  He had probably started to talk
aloud, when alone, when the boy had left.  But he did not remember.
When he and the boy fished together they usually spoke only when it was
necessary.  They talked at night or when they were storm-bound by bad
weather.  It was considered a virtue not to talk unnecessarily at sea
and the old man had always considered it so and respected it.  But now
he said his thoughts aloud many times since there was no one that they
could annoy.

"If the others heard me talking out loud they would think that I am
crazy," he said aloud.  "But since I am not crazy, I do not care.  And
the rich have radios to talk to them in their boats and to bring them
the baseball."

Now is no time to think of baseball, he thought.  Now is the time to
think of only one thing.  That which I was born for.  There might be a
big one around that school, he thought.  I picked up only a straggler
from the albacore that were feeding.  But they are working far out and
fast.  Everything that shows on the surface today travels very fast and
to the north-east.  Can that be the time of day?  Or is it some sign of
weather that I do not know?

He could not see the green of the shore now but only the tops of the
blue hills that showed white as though they were snow-capped and the
clouds that looked like high snow mountains above them.  The sea was
very dark and the light made prisms in the water.  The myriad flecks of
the plankton were annulled now by the high sun and it was only the
great deep prisms in the blue water that the old man saw now with his
lines going straight down into the water that was a mile deep.

The tuna, the fishermen called all the fish of that species tuna and
only distinguished among them by their proper names when they came to
sell them or to trade them for baits, were down again.  The sun was hot
now and the old man felt it on the back of his neck and felt the sweat
trickle down his back as he rowed.

I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a bight of line
around my toe to wake me.  But today is eighty-five days and I should
fish the day well.

Just then, watching his lines, he saw one of the projecting green
sticks dip sharply.

"Yes," he said.  "Yes," and shipped his oars without bumping the boat.
He reached out for the line and held it softly between the thumb and
forefinger of his right hand.  He felt no strain nor weight and he held
the line lightly.  Then it came again.  This time it was a tentative
pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew exactly what it was.  One
hundred fathoms down a marlin was eating the sardines that covered the
point and the shank of the hook where the hand-forged hook projected
from the head of the small tuna.

The old man held the line delicately, and softly, with his left hand,
unleashed it from the stick.  Now he could let it run through his
fingers without the fish feeling any tension.

This far out, he must be huge in this month, he thought.  Eat them,
fish.  Eat them.  Please eat them.  How fresh they are and you down
there six hundred feet in that cold water in the dark.  Make another
turn in the dark and come back and eat them.

He felt the light delicate pulling and then a harder pull when a
sardine's head must have been more difficult to break from the hook.
Then there was nothing.

"Come on," the old man said aloud.  "Make another turn.  Just smell
them.  Aren't they lovely?  Eat them good now and then there is the
tuna.  Hard and cold and lovely.  Don't be shy, fish.  Eat them."

He waited with the line between his thumb and his finger, watching it
and the other lines at the same time for the fish might have swum up or
down.  Then came the same delicate pulling touch again.

"He'll take it," the old man said aloud.  "God help him to take it."

He did not take it though.  He was gone and the old man felt nothing.

"He can't have gone," he said.  "Christ knows he can't have gone.  He's
making a turn.  Maybe he has been hooked before and he remembers
something of it."

Then he felt the gentle touch on the line and he was happy.

"It was only his turn," he said.  "He'll take it."

He was happy feeling the gentle pulling and then he felt something hard
and unbelievably heavy.  It was the weight of the fish and he let the
line slip down, down, down, unrolling off the first of the two reserve
coils.  As it went down, slipping lightly through the old man's
fingers, he still could feel the great weight, though the pressure of
his thumb and finger were almost imperceptible.

"What a fish," he said.  "He has it sideways in his mouth now and he is
moving off with it."

Then he will turn and swallow it, he thought.  He did not say that
because he knew that if you said a good thing it might not happen.  He
knew what a huge fish this was and he thought of him moving away in the
darkness with the tuna held crosswise in his mouth.  At that moment he
felt him stop moving but the weight was still there.  Then the weight
increased and he gave more line.  He tightened the pressure of his
thumb and finger for a moment and the weight increased and was going
straight down.

"He's taken it," he said.  "Now I'll let him eat it well."

He let the line slip through his fingers while he reached down with his
left hand and made fast the free end of the two reserve coils to the
loop of the two reserve coils of the next line.  Now he was ready.  He
had three forty-fathom coils of line in reserve now, as well as the
coil he was using.

"Eat it a little more," he said.  "Eat it well."

Eat it so that the point of the hook goes into your heart and kills
you, he thought.  Come up easy and let me put the harpoon into you.
All right.  Are you ready?  Have you been long enough at table?

"Now!" he said aloud and struck hard with both hands, gained a yard of
line and then struck again and again, swinging with each arm
alternately on the cord with all the strength of his arms and the
pivoted weight of his body.

Nothing happened.  The fish just moved away slowly and the old man
could not raise him an inch.  His line was strong and made for heavy
fish and he held it against his back until it was so taut that beads of
water were jumping from it.  Then it began to make a slow hissing sound
in the water and he still held it, bracing himself against the thwart
and leaning back against the pull.  The boat began to move slowly off
toward the North-West.

The fish moved steadily and they travelled slowly on the calm water.
The other baits were still in the water but there was nothing to be
done.

"I wish I had the boy," the old man said aloud.  "I'm being towed by a
fish and I'm the towing bitt.  I could make the line fast.  But then he
could break it.  I must hold him all I can and give him line when he
must have it.  Thank God he is travelling and not going down."

What I will do if he decides to go down, I don't know.  What I'll do if
he sounds and dies I don't know.  But I'll do something.  There are
plenty of things I can do.

He held the line against his back and watched its slant in the water
and the skiff moving steadily to the North-West.

This will kill him, the old man thought.  He can't do this forever.
But four hours later the fish was still swimming steadily out to sea,
towing the skiff, and the old man was still braced solidly with the
line across his back.

"It was noon when I hooked him," he said.  "And I have never seen him."

He had pushed his straw hat hard down on his head before he hooked the
fish and it was cutting his forehead.  He was thirsty too and he got
down on his knees and, being careful not to jerk on the line, moved as
far into the bow as he could get and reached the water bottle with one
hand.  He opened it and drank a little.  Then he rested against the
bow.  He rested sitting on the un-stepped mast and sail and tried not
to think but only to endure.

Then he looked behind him and saw that no land was visible.  That makes
no difference, he thought.  I can always come in on the glow from
Havana.  There are two more hours before the sun sets and maybe he will
come up before that.  If he doesn't maybe he will come up with the
moon.  If he does not do that maybe he will come up with the sunrise.
I have no cramps and I feel strong.  It is he that has the hook in his
mouth.  But what a fish to pull like that.  He must have his mouth shut
tight on the wire.  I wish I could see him.  I wish I could see him
only once to know what I have against me.

The fish never changed his course nor his direction all that night as
far as the man could tell from watching the stars.  It was cold after
the sun went down and the old man's sweat dried cold on his back and
his arms and his old legs.  During the day he had taken the sack that
covered the bait box and spread it in the sun to dry.  After the sun
went down he tied it around his neck so that it hung down over his back
and he cautiously worked it down under the line that was across his
shoulders now.  The sack cushioned the line and he had found a way of
leaning forward against the bow so that he was almost comfortable.  The
position actually was only somewhat less intolerable; but he thought of
it as almost comfortable.

I can do nothing with him and he can do nothing with me, he thought.
Not as long as he keeps this up.

Once he stood up and urinated over the side of the skiff and looked at
the stars and checked his course.  The line showed like a
phosphorescent streak in the water straight out from his shoulders.
They were moving more slowly now and the glow of Havana was not so
strong, so that he knew the current must be carrying them to the
eastward.  If I lose the glare of Havana we must be going more to the
eastward, he thought.  For if the fish's course held true I must see it
for many more hours.  I wonder how the baseball came out in the grand
leagues today, he thought.  It would be wonderful to do this with a
radio.  Then he thought, think of it always.  Think of what you are
doing.  You must do nothing stupid.

Then he said aloud, "I wish I had the boy.  To help me and to see this."

No one should be alone in their old age, he thought.  But it is
unavoidable.  I must remember to eat the tuna before he spoils in order
to keep strong.  Remember, no matter how little you want to, that you
must eat him in the morning.  Remember, he said to himself.

During the night two porpoise came around the boat and he could hear
them rolling and blowing.  He could tell the difference between the
blowing noise the male made and the sighing blow of the female.

"They are good," he said.  "They play and make jokes and love one
another.  They are our brothers like the flying fish."

Then he began to pity the great fish that he had hooked.  He is
wonderful and strange and who knows how old he is, he thought.  Never
have I had such a strong fish nor one who acted so strangely.  Perhaps
he is too wise to jump.  He could ruin me by jumping or by a wild rush.
But perhaps he has been hooked many times before and he knows that this
is how he should make his fight.  He cannot know that it is only one
man against him, nor that it is an old man.  But what a great fish he
is and what he will bring in the market if the flesh is good.  He took
the bait like a male and he pulls like a male and his fight has no
panic in it.  I wonder if he has any plans or if he is just as
desperate as I am?

He remembered the time he had hooked one of a pair of marlin.  The male
fish always let the female fish feed first and the hooked fish, the
female, made a wild, panic-stricken, despairing fight that soon
exhausted her, and all the time the male had stayed with her, crossing
the line and circling with her on the surface.  He had stayed so close
that the old man was afraid he would cut the line with his tail which
was sharp as a scythe and almost of that size and shape.  When the old
man had gaffed her and clubbed her, holding the rapier bill with its
sandpaper edge and clubbing her across the top of her head until her
colour turned to a colour almost like the backing of mirrors, and then,
with the boy's aid, hoisted her aboard, the male fish had stayed by the
side of the boat.  Then, while the old man was clearing the lines and
preparing the harpoon, the male fish jumped high into the air beside
the boat to see where the female was and then went down deep, his
lavender wings, that were his pectoral fins, spread wide and all his
wide lavender stripes showing.  He was beautiful, the old man
remembered, and he had stayed.

That was the saddest thing I ever saw with them, the old man thought.
The boy was sad too and we begged her pardon and butchered her promptly.

"I wish the boy was here," he said aloud and settled himself against
the rounded planks of the bow and felt the strength of the great fish
through the line he held across his shoulders moving steadily toward
whatever he had chosen.

When once, through my treachery, it had been necessary to him to make a
choice, the old man thought.

His choice had been to stay in the deep dark water far out beyond all
snares and traps and treacheries.  My choice was to go there to find
him beyond all people.  Beyond all people in the world.  Now we are
joined together and have been since noon.  And no one to help either
one of us.

Perhaps I should not have been a fisherman, he thought.  But that was
the thing that I was born for.  I must surely remember to eat the tuna
after it gets light.

Some time before daylight something took one of the baits that were
behind him.  He heard the stick break and the line begin to rush out
over the gunwale of the skiff.  In the darkness he loosened his sheath
knife and taking all the strain of the fish on his left shoulder he
leaned back and cut the line against the wood of the gunwale.  Then he
cut the other line closest to him and in the dark made the loose ends
of the reserve coils fast.  He worked skillfully with the one hand and
put his foot on the coils to hold them as he drew his knots tight.  Now
he had six reserve coils of line.  There were two from each bait he had
severed and the two from the bait the fish had taken and they were all
connected.

After it is light, he thought, I will work back to the forty-fathom
bait and cut it away too and link up the reserve coils.  I will have
lost two hundred fathoms of good Catalan _cordel_ and the hooks and
leaders.  That can be replaced.  But who replaces this fish if I hook
some fish and it cuts him off?  I don't know what that fish was that
took the bait just now.  It could have been a marlin or a broadbill or
a shark.  I never felt him.  I had to get rid of him too fast.

Aloud he said, "I wish I had the boy."

But you haven't got the boy, he thought.  You have only yourself and
you had better work back to the last line now, in the dark or not in
the dark, and cut it away and hook up the two reserve coils.

So he did it.  It was difficult in the dark and once the fish made a
surge that pulled him down on his face and made a cut below his eye.
The blood ran down his cheek a little way.  But it coagulated and dried
before it reached his chin and he worked his way back to the bow and
rested against the wood.  He adjusted the sack and carefully worked the
line so that it came across a new part of his shoulders and, holding it
anchored with his shoulders, he carefully felt the pull of the fish and
then felt with his hand the progress of the skiff through the water.

I wonder what he made that lurch for, he thought.  The wire must have
slipped on the great hill of his back.  Certainly his back cannot feel
as badly as mine does.  But he cannot pull this skiff forever, no
matter how great he is.  Now everything is cleared away that might make
trouble and I have a big reserve of line; all that a man can ask.

"Fish," he said softly, aloud, "I'll stay with you until I am dead."

He'll stay with me too, I suppose, the old man thought and he waited
for it to be light.  It was cold now in the time before daylight and he
pushed against the wood to be warm.  I can do it as long as he can, he
thought.  And in the first light the line extended out and down into
the water.  The boat moved steadily and when the first edge of the sun
rose it was on the old man's right shoulder.

"He's headed north," the old man said.  The current will have set us
far to the eastward, he thought.  I wish he would turn with the
current.  That would show that he was tiring.

When the sun had risen further the old man realized that the fish was
not tiring.  There was only one favorable sign.  The slant of the line
showed he was swimming at a lesser depth.  That did not necessarily
mean that he would jump.  But he might.

"God let him jump," the old man said.  "I have enough line to handle
him."

Maybe if I can increase the tension just a little it will hurt him and
he will jump, he thought.  Now that it is daylight let him jump so that
he'll fill the sacks along his backbone with air and then he cannot go
deep to die.

He tried to increase the tension, but the line had been taut up to the
very edge of the breaking point since he had hooked the fish and he
felt the harshness as he leaned back to pull and knew he could put no
more strain on it.  I must not jerk it ever, he thought.  Each jerk
widens the cut the hook makes and then when he does jump he might throw
it.  Anyway I feel better with the sun and for once I do not have to
look into it.

There was yellow weed on the line but the old man knew that only made
an added drag and he was pleased.  It was the yellow Gulf weed that had
made so much phosphorescence in the night.

"Fish," he said, "I love you and respect you very much.  But I will
kill you dead before this day ends."

Let us hope so, he thought.

A small bird came toward the skiff from the north.  He was a warbler
and flying very low over the water.  The old man could see that he was
very tired.

The bird made the stern of the boat and rested there.  Then he flew
around the old man's head and rested on the line where he was more
comfortable.

"How old are you?" the old man asked the bird.  "Is this your first
trip?"

The bird looked at him when he spoke.  He was too tired even to examine
the line and he teetered on it as his delicate feet gripped it fast.

"It's steady," the old man told him.  "It's too steady.  You shouldn't
be that tired after a windless night.  What are birds coming to?"

The hawks, he thought, that come out to sea to meet them.  But he said
nothing of this to the bird who could not understand him anyway and who
would learn about the hawks soon enough.

"Take a good rest, small bird," he said.  "Then go in and take your
chance like any man or bird or fish."

It encouraged him to talk because his back had stiffened in the night
and it hurt truly now.

"Stay at my house if you like, bird," he said.  "I am sorry I cannot
hoist the sail and take you in with the small breeze that is rising.
But I am with a friend."

Just then the fish gave a sudden lurch that pulled the old man down
onto the bow and would have pulled him overboard if he had not braced
himself and given some line.

The bird had flown up when the line jerked and the old man had not even
seen him go.  He felt the line carefully with his right hand and
noticed his hand was bleeding.

"Something hurt him then," he said aloud and pulled back on the line to
see if he could turn the fish.  But when he was touching the breaking
point he held steady and settled back against the strain of the line.

"You're feeling it now, fish," he said.  "And so, God knows, am I."

He looked around for the bird now because he would have liked him for
company.  The bird was gone.

You did not stay long, the man thought.  But it is rougher where you
are going until you make the shore.  How did I let the fish cut me with
that one quick pull he made?  I must be getting very stupid.  Or
perhaps I was looking at the small bird and thinking of him.  Now I
will pay attention to my work and then I must eat the tuna so that I
will not have a failure of strength.

"I wish the boy were here and that I had some salt," he said aloud.

Shifting the weight of the line to his left shoulder and kneeling
carefully he washed his hand in the ocean and held it there, submerged,
for more than a minute watching the blood trail away and the steady
movement of the water against his hand as the boat moved.

"He has slowed much," he said.

The old man would have liked to keep his hand in the salt water longer
but he was afraid of another sudden lurch by the fish and he stood up
and braced himself and held his hand up against the sun.  It was only a
line burn that had cut his flesh.  But it was in the working part of
his hand.  He knew he would need his hands before this was over and he
did not like to be cut before it started.

"Now," he said, when his hand had dried, "I must eat the small tuna.  I
can reach him with the gaff and eat him here in comfort."

He knelt down and found the tuna under the stern with the gaff and drew
it toward him keeping it clear of the coiled lines.  Holding the line
with his left shoulder again, and bracing on his left hand and arm, he
took the tuna off the gaff hook and put the gaff back in place.  He put
one knee on the fish and cut strips of dark red meat longitudinally
from the back of the head to the tail.  They were wedge-shaped strips
and he cut them from next to the back bone down to the edge of the
belly.  When he had cut six strips he spread them out on the wood of
the bow, wiped his knife on his trousers, and lifted the carcass of the
bonito by the tail and dropped it overboard.

"I don't think I can eat an entire one," he said and drew his knife
across one of the strips.  He could feel the steady hard pull of the
line and his left hand was cramped.  It drew up tight on the heavy cord
and he looked at it in disgust.

"What kind of a hand is that," he said.  "Cramp then if you want.  Make
yourself into a claw.  It will do you no good."

Come on, he thought and looked down into the dark water at the slant of
the line.  Eat it now and it will strengthen the hand.  It is not the
hand's fault and you have been many hours with the fish.  But you can
stay with him forever.  Eat the bonito now.

He picked up a piece and put it in his mouth and chewed it slowly.  It
was not unpleasant.

Chew it well, he thought, and get all the juices.  It would not be bad
to eat with a little lime or with lemon or with salt.

"How do you feel, hand?" he asked the cramped hand that was almost as
stiff as rigor mortis.  "I'll eat some more for you."


He ate the other part of the piece that he had cut in two.  He chewed
it carefully and then spat out the skin.

"How does it go, hand?  Or is it too early to know?"

He took another full piece and chewed it.

"It is a strong full-blooded fish," he thought.  "I was lucky to get
him instead of dolphin.  Dolphin is too sweet.  This is hardly sweet at
all and all the strength is still in it."

There is no sense in being anything but practical though, he thought.
I wish I had some salt.  And I do not know whether the sun will rot or
dry what is left, so I had better eat it all although I am not hungry.
The fish is calm and steady.  I will eat it all and then I will be
ready.

"Be patient, hand," he said.  "I do this for you."

I wish I could feed the fish, he thought.  He is my brother.  But I
must kill him and keep strong to do it.  Slowly and conscientiously he
ate all of the wedge-shaped strips of fish.

He straightened up, wiping his hand on his trousers.

"Now," he said.  "You can let the cord go, hand, and I will handle him
with the right arm alone until you stop that nonsense."  He put his
left foot on the heavy line that the left hand had held and lay back
against the pull against his back.

"God help me to have the cramp go," he said.  "Because I do not know
what the fish is going to do."

But he seems calm, he thought, and following his plan.  But what is his
plan, he thought.  And what is mine?  Mine I must improvise to his
because of his great size.  If he will jump I can kill him.  But he
stays down forever.  Then I will stay down with him forever.

He rubbed the cramped hand against his trousers and tried to gentle the
fingers.  But it would not open.  Maybe it will open with the sun, he
thought.  Maybe it will open when the strong raw tuna is digested.  If
I have to have it, I will open it, cost whatever it costs.  But I do
not want to open it now by force.  Let it open by itself and come back
of its own accord.  After all I abused it much in the night when it was
necessary to free and unite the various lines.

He looked across the sea and knew how alone he was now.  But he could
see the prisms in the deep dark water and the line stretching ahead and
the strange undulation of the calm.  The clouds were building up now
for the trade wind and he looked ahead and saw a flight of wild ducks
etching themselves against the sky over the water, then blurring, then
etching again and he knew no man was ever alone on the sea.

He thought of how some men feared being out of sight of land in a small
boat and knew they were right in the months of sudden bad weather.  But
now they were in hurricane months and, when there are no hurricanes,
the weather of hurricane months is the best of all the year.

If there is a hurricane you always see the signs of it in the sky for
days ahead, if you are at sea.  They do not see it ashore because they
do not know what to look for, he thought.  The land must make a
difference too, in the shape of the clouds.  But we have no hurricane
coming now.

He looked at the sky and saw the white cumulus built like friendly
piles of ice cream and high above were the thin feathers of the cirrus
against the high September sky.

"Light _brisa_," he said.  "Better weather for me than for you, fish."

His left hand was still cramped, but he was unknotting it slowly.

I hate a cramp, he thought.  It is a treachery of one's own body.  It
is humiliating before others to have a diarrhoea from ptomaine
poisoning or to vomit from it.  But a cramp, he thought of it as a
_calambre_, humiliates oneself especially when one is alone.

If the boy were here he could rub it for me and loosen it down from the
forearm, he thought.  But it will loosen up.

Then, with his right hand he felt the difference in the pull of the
line before he saw the slant change in the water.  Then, as he leaned
against the line and slapped his left hand hard and fast against his
thigh he saw the line slanting slowly upward.

"He's coming up," he said.  "Come on hand.  Please come on."

The line rose slowly and steadily and then the surface of the ocean
bulged ahead of the boat and the fish came out.  He came out unendingly
and water poured from his sides.  He was bright in the sun and his head
and back were dark purple and in the sun the stripes on his sides
showed wide and a light lavender.  His sword was as long as a baseball
bat and tapered like a rapier and he rose his full length from the
water and then re-entered it, smoothly, like a diver and the old man
saw the great scythe-blade of his tail go under and the line commenced
to race out.

"He is two feet longer than the skiff," the old man said.  The line was
going out fast but steadily and the fish was not panicked.  The old man
was trying with both hands to keep the line just inside of breaking
strength.  He knew that if he could not slow the fish with a steady
pressure the fish could take out all the line and break it.

He is a great fish and I must convince him, he thought.  I must never
let him learn his strength nor what he could do if he made his run.  If
I were him I would put in everything now and go until something broke.
But, thank God, they are not as intelligent as we who kill them;
although they are more noble and more able.

The old man had seen many great fish.  He had seen many that weighed
more than a thousand pounds and he had caught two of that size in his
life, but never alone.  Now alone, and out of sight of land, he was
fast to the biggest fish that he had ever seen and bigger than he had
ever heard of, and his left hand was still as tight as the gripped
claws of an eagle.

It will uncramp though, he thought.  Surely it will uncramp to help my
right hand.  There are three things that are brothers: the fish and my
two hands.  It must uncramp.  It is unworthy of it to be cramped.  The
fish had slowed again and was going at his usual pace.

I wonder why he jumped, the old man thought.  He jumped almost as
though to show me how big he was.  I know now, anyway, he thought.  I
wish I could show him what sort of man I am.  But then he would see the
cramped hand.  Let him think I am more man than I am and I will be so.
I wish I was the fish, he thought, with everything he has against only
my will and my intelligence.

He settled comfortably against the wood and took his suffering as it
came and the fish swam steadily and the boat moved slowly through the
dark water.  There was a small sea rising with the wind coming up from
the east and at noon the old man's left hand was uncramped.

"Bad news for you, fish," he said and shifted the line over the sacks
that covered his shoulders.

He was comfortable but suffering, although he did not admit the
suffering at all.

"I am not religious," he said.  "But I will say ten Our Fathers and ten
Hail Marys that I should catch this fish, and I promise to make a
pilgrimage to the Virgen de Cobre if I catch him.  That is a promise."

He commenced to say his prayers mechanically.  Sometimes he would be so
tired that he could not remember the prayer and then he would say them
fast so that they would come automatically.  Hail Marys are easier to
say than Our Fathers, he thought.

"Hail Mary full of Grace the Lord is with thee.  Blessed art thou among
women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.  Holy Mary, Mother
of God, pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death.  Amen."
Then he added, "Blessed Virgin, pray for the death of this fish.
Wonderful though he is."

With his prayers said, and feeling much better, but suffering exactly
as much, and perhaps a little more, he leaned against the wood of the
bow and began, mechanically, to work the fingers of his left hand.

The sun was hot now although the breeze was rising gently.

"I had better re-bait that little line out over the stern," he said.
"If the fish decides to stay another night I will need to eat again and
the water is low in the bottle.  I don't think I can get anything but a
dolphin here.  But if I eat him fresh enough he won't be bad.  I wish a
flying fish would come on board tonight.  But I have no light to
attract them.  A flying fish is excellent to eat raw and I would not
have to cut him up.  I must save all my strength now.  Christ, I did
not know he was so big."

"I'll kill him though," he said.  "In all his greatness and his glory."

Although it is unjust, he thought.  But I will show him what a man can
do and what a man endures.

"I told the boy I was a strange old man," he said.  "Now is when I must
prove it."

The thousand times that he had proved it meant nothing.  Now he was
proving it again.  Each time was a new time and he never thought about
the past when he was doing it.

I wish he'd sleep and I could sleep and dream about the lions, he
thought.  Why are the lions the main thing that is left?  Don't think,
old man, he said to himself.  Rest gently now against the wood and
think of nothing.  He is working.  Work as little as you can.

It was getting into the afternoon and the boat still moved slowly and
steadily.  But there was an added drag now from the easterly breeze and
the old man rode gently with the small sea and the hurt of the cord
across his back came to him easily and smoothly.

Once in the afternoon the line started to rise again.  But the fish
only continued to swim at a slightly higher level.  The sun was on the
old man's left arm and shoulder and on his back.  So he knew the fish
had turned east of north.

Now that he had seen him once, he could picture the fish swimming in
the water with his purple pectoral fins set wide as wings and the great
erect tail slicing through the dark.  I wonder how much he sees at that
depth, the old man thought.  His eye is huge and a horse, with much
less eye, can see in the dark.  Once I could see quite well in the
dark.  Not in the absolute dark.  But almost as a cat sees.

The sun and his steady movement of his fingers had uncramped his left
hand now completely and he began to shift more of the strain to it and
he shrugged the muscles of his back to shift the hurt of the cord a
little.

"If you're not tired, fish," he said aloud, "you must be very strange."

He felt very tired now and he knew the night would come soon and he
tried to think of other things.  He thought of the Big Leagues, to him
they were the _Gran Ligas_, and he knew that the Yankees of New York
were playing the _Tigres_ of Detroit.

This is the second day now that I do not know the result of the
_juegos_, he thought.  But I must have confidence and I must be worthy
of the great DiMaggio who does all things perfectly even with the pain
of the bone spur in his heel.  What is a bone spur? he asked himself.
_Un espuela de hueso_.  We do not have them.  Can it be as painful as
the spur of a fighting cock in one's heel?  I do not think I could
endure that or the loss of the eye and of both eyes and continue to
fight as the fighting cocks do.  Man is not much beside the great birds
and beasts.  Still I would rather be that beast down there in the
darkness of the sea.

"Unless sharks come," he said aloud.  "If sharks come, God pity him and
me."

Do you believe the great DiMaggio would stay with a fish as long as I
will stay with this one? he thought.  I am sure he would and more since
he is young and strong.  Also his father was a fisherman.  But would
the bone spur hurt him too much?

"I do not know," he said aloud.  "I never had a bone spur."

As the sun set he remembered, to give himself more confidence, the time
in the tavern at Casablanca when he had played the hand game with the
great negro from Cienfuegos who was the strongest man on the docks.
They had gone one day and one night with their elbows on a chalk line
on the table and their forearms straight up and their hands gripped
tight.  Each one was trying to force the other's hand down onto the
table.  There was much betting and people went in and out of the room
under the kerosene lights and he had looked at the arm and hand of the
negro and at the negro's face.  They changed the referees every four
hours after the first eight so that the referees could sleep.  Blood
came out from under the fingernails of both his and the negro's hands
and they looked each other in the eye and at their hands and forearms
and the bettors went in and out of the room and sat on high chairs
against the wall and watched.  The walls were painted bright blue and
were of wood and the lamps threw their shadows against them.  The
negro's shadow was huge and it moved on the wall as the breeze moved
the lamps.

The odds would change back and forth all night and they fed the negro
rum and lighted cigarettes for him.  Then the negro, after the rum,
would try for a tremendous effort and once he had the old man, who was
not an old man then but was Santiago El Campeon, nearly three inches
off balance.  But the old man had raised his hand up to dead even
again.  He was sure then that he had the negro, who was a fine man and
a great athlete, beaten.  And at daylight when the bettors were asking
that it be called a draw and the referee was shaking his head, he had
unleashed his effort and forced the hand of the negro down and down
until it rested on the wood.  The match had started on a Sunday morning
and ended on a Monday morning.  Many of the bettors had asked for a
draw because they had to go to work on the docks loading sacks of sugar
or at the Havana Coal Company.  Otherwise everyone would have wanted it
to go to a finish.  But he had finished it anyway and before anyone had
to go to work.

For a long time after that everyone had called him The Champion and
there had been a return match in the spring.  But not much money was
bet and he had won it quite easily since he had broken the confidence
of the negro from Cienfuegos in the first match.  After that he had a
few matches and then no more.  He decided that he could beat anyone if
he wanted to badly enough and he decided that it was bad for his right
hand for fishing.  He had tried a few practice matches with his left
hand.  But his left hand had always been a traitor and would not do
what he called on it to do and he did not trust it.

The sun will bake it out well now, he thought.  It should not cramp on
me again unless it gets too cold in the night.  I wonder what this
night will bring.

An airplane passed over head on its course to Miami and he watched its
shadow scaring up the schools of flying fish.

"With so much flying fish there should be dolphin," he said, and leaned
back on the line to see if it was possible to gain any on his fish.
But he could not and it stayed at the hardness and water-drop shivering
that preceded breaking.  The boat moved ahead slowly and he watched the
airplane until he could no longer see it.

It must be very strange in an airplane, he thought.  I wonder what the
sea looks like from that height?  They should be able to see the fish
well if they do not fly too high.  I would like to fly very slowly at
two hundred fathoms high and see the fish from above.  In the turtle
boats I was in the cross-trees of the mast-head and even at that height
I saw much.  The dolphin look greener from there and you can see their
stripes and their purple spots and you can see all of the school as
they swim.  Why is it that all the fast-moving fish of the dark current
have purple backs and usually purple stripes or spots?  The dolphin
looks green of course because he is really golden.  But when he comes
to feed, truly hungry, purple stripes show on his sides as on a marlin.
Can it be anger, or the greater speed he makes that brings them out?

Just before it was dark, as they passed a great island of Sargasso weed
that heaved and swung in the light sea as though the ocean were making
love with something under a yellow blanket, his small line was taken by
a dolphin.  He saw it first when it jumped in the air, true gold in the
last of the sun and bending and flapping wildly in the air.  It jumped
again and again in the acrobatics of its fear and he worked his way
back to the stern and crouching and holding the big line with his right
hand and arm, he pulled the dolphin in with his left hand, stepping on
the gained line each time with his bare left foot.  When the fish was
at the stern, plunging and cutting from side to side in desperation,
the old man leaned over the stern and lifted the burnished gold fish
with its purple spots over the stern.  Its jaws were working
convulsively in quick bites against the hook and it pounded the bottom
of the skiff with its long flat body, its tail and its head until he
clubbed it across the shining golden head until it shivered and was
still.

The old man unhooked the fish, rebaited the line with another sardine
and tossed it over.  Then he worked his way slowly back to the bow.  He
washed his left hand and wiped it on his trousers.  Then he shifted the
heavy line from his right hand to his left and washed his right hand in
the sea while he watched the sun go into the ocean and the slant of the
big cord.

"He hasn't changed at all," he said.  But watching the movement of the
water against his hand he noted that it was perceptibly slower.

"I'll lash the two oars together across the stern and that will slow
him in the night," he said.  "He's good for the night and so am I."

It would be better to gut the dolphin a little later to save the blood
in the meat, he thought.  I can do that a little later and lash the
oars to make a drag at the same time.  I had better keep the fish quiet
now and not disturb him too much at sunset.  The setting of the sun is
a difficult time for all fish.

He let his hand dry in the air then grasped the line with it and eased
himself as much as he could and allowed himself to be pulled forward
against the wood so that the boat took the strain as much, or more,
than he did.

I'm learning how to do it, he thought.  This part of it anyway.  Then
too, remember he hasn't eaten since he took the bait and he is huge and
needs much food.  I have eaten the whole bonito.  Tomorrow I will eat
the dolphin.  He called it _dorado_.  Perhaps I should eat some of it
when I clean it.  It will be harder to eat than the bonito.  But, then,
nothing is easy.

"How do you feel, fish?" he asked aloud.  "I feel good and my left hand
is better and I have food for a night and a day.  Pull the boat, fish."

He did not truly feel good because the pain from the cord across his
back had almost passed pain and gone into a dullness that he
mistrusted.  But I have had worse things than that, he thought.  My
hand is only cut a little and the cramp is gone from the other.  My
legs are all right.  Also now I have gained on him in the question of
sustenance.

It was dark now as it becomes dark quickly after the sun sets in
September.  He lay against the worn wood of the bow and rested all that
he could.  The first stars were out.  He did not know the name of Rigel
but he saw it and knew soon they would all be out and he would have all
his distant friends.

"The fish is my friend too," he said aloud.  "I have never seen or
heard of such a fish.  But I must kill him.  I am glad we do not have
to try to kill the stars."

Imagine if each day a man must try to kill the moon, he thought.  The
moon runs away.  But imagine if a man each day should have to try to
kill the sun?  We were born lucky, he thought.

Then he was sorry for the great fish that had nothing to eat and his
determination to kill him never relaxed in his sorrow for him.  How
many people will he feed, he thought.  But are they worthy to eat him?
No, of course not.  There is no one worthy of eating him from the
manner of his behaviour and his great dignity.

I do not understand these things, he thought.  But it is good that we
do not have to try to kill the sun or the moon or the stars.  It is
enough to live on the sea and kill our true brothers.

Now, he thought, I must think about the drag.  It has its perils and
its merits.  I may lose so much line that I will lose him, if he makes
his effort and the drag made by the oars is in place and the boat loses
all her lightness.  Her lightness prolongs both our suffering but it is
my safety since he has great speed that he has never yet employed.  No
matter what passes I must gut the dolphin so he does not spoil and eat
some of him to be strong.

Now I will rest an hour more and feel that he is solid and steady
before I move back to the stern to do the work and make the decision.
In the meantime I can see how he acts and if he shows any changes.  The
oars are a good trick; but it has reached the time to play for safety.
He is much fish still and I saw that the hook was in the corner of his
mouth and he has kept his mouth tight shut.  The punishment of the hook
is nothing.  The punishment of hunger, and that he is against something
that he does not comprehend, is everything.  Rest now, old man, and let
him work until your next duty comes.

He rested for what he believed to be two hours.  The moon did not rise
now until late and he had no way of judging the time.  Nor was he
really resting except comparatively.  He was still bearing the pull of
the fish across his shoulders but he placed his left hand on the
gunwale of the bow and confided more and more of the resistance to the
fish to the skiff itself.

How simple it would be if I could make the line fast, he thought.  But
with one small lurch he could break it.  I must cushion the pull of the
line with my body and at all times be ready to give line with both
hands.

"But you have not slept yet, old man," he said aloud.  "It is half a
day and a night and now another day and you have not slept.  You must
devise a way so that you sleep a little if he is quiet and steady.  If
you do not sleep you might become unclear in the head."

I'm clear enough in the head, he thought.  Too clear.  I am as clear as
the stars that are my brothers.  Still I must sleep.  They sleep and
the moon and the sun sleep and even the ocean sleeps sometimes on
certain days when there is no current and a flat calm.

But remember to sleep, he thought.  Make yourself do it and devise some
simple and sure way about the lines.  Now go back and prepare the
dolphin.  It is too dangerous to rig the oars as a drag if you must
sleep.

I could go without sleeping, he told himself.  But it would be too
dangerous.

He started to work his way back to the stern on his hands and knees,
being careful not to jerk against the fish.  He may be half asleep
himself, he thought.  But I do not want him to rest.  He must pull
until he dies.

Back in the stern he turned so that his left hand held the strain of
the line across his shoulders and drew his knife from its sheath with
his right hand.  The stars were bright now and he saw the dolphin
clearly and he pushed the blade of his knife into his head and drew him

out from under the stern.  He put one of his feet on the fish and slit
him quickly from the vent up to the tip of his lower jaw.  Then he put
his knife down and gutted him with his right hand, scooping him clean
and pulling the gills clear.  He felt the maw heavy and slippery in his
hands and he slit it open.  There were two flying fish inside.  They
were fresh and hard and he laid them side by side and dropped the guts
and the gills over the stern.  They sank leaving a trail of
phosphorescence in the water.  The dolphin was cold and a leprous
gray-white now in the starlight and the old man skinned one side of him
while he held his right foot on the fish's head.  Then he turned him
over and skinned the other side and cut each side off from the head
down to the tail.

He slid the carcass overboard and looked to see if there was any swirl
in the water.  But there was only the light of its slow descent.  He
turned then and placed the two flying fish inside the two fillets of
fish and putting his knife back in its sheath, he worked his way slowly
back to the bow.  His back was bent with the weight of the line across
it and he carried the fish in his right hand.

Back in the bow he laid the two fillets of fish out on the wood with
the flying fish beside them.  After that he settled the line across his
shoulders in a new place and held it again with his left hand resting
on the gunwale.  Then he leaned over the side and washed the flying
fish in the water, noting the speed of the water against his hand.  His
hand was phosphorescent from skinning the fish and he watched the flow
of the water against it.  The flow was less strong and as he rubbed the
side of his hand against the planking of the skiff, particles of
phosphorus floated off and drifted slowly astern.

"He is tiring or he is resting," the old man said.  "Now let me get
through the eating of this dolphin and get some rest and a little
sleep."

Under the stars and with the night colder all the time he ate half of
one of the dolphin fillets and one of the flying fish, gutted and with
its head cut off.

"What an excellent fish dolphin is to eat cooked," he said.  "And what
a miserable fish raw.  I will never go in a boat again without salt or
limes."

If I had brains I would have splashed water on the bow all day and
drying, it would have made salt, he thought.  But then I did not hook
the dolphin until almost sunset.  Still it was a lack of preparation.
But I have chewed it all well and I am not nauseated.

The sky was clouding over to the east and one after another the stars
he knew were gone.  It looked now as though he were moving into a great
canyon of clouds and the wind had dropped.

"There will be bad weather in three or four days," he said.  "But not
tonight and not tomorrow.  Rig now to get some sleep, old man, while
the fish is calm and steady."

He held the line tight in his right hand and then pushed his thigh
against his right hand as he leaned all his weight against the wood of
the bow.  Then he passed the line a little lower on his shoulders and
braced his left hand on it.

My right hand can hold it as long as it is braced, he thought.  If it
relaxes in sleep my left hand will wake me as the line goes out.  It is
hard on the right hand.  But he is used to punishment.  Even if I sleep
twenty minutes or a half an hour it is good.  He lay forward cramping
himself against the line with all of his body, putting all his weight
onto his right hand, and he was asleep.

He did not dream of the lions but instead of a vast school of porpoises
that stretched for eight or ten miles and it was in the time of their
mating and they would leap high into the air and return into the same
hole they had made in the water when they leaped.

Then he dreamed that he was in the village on his bed and there was a
norther and he was very cold and his right arm was asleep because his
head had rested on it instead of a pillow.

After that he began to dream of the long yellow beach and he saw the
first of the lions come down onto it in the early dark and then the
other lions came and he rested his chin on the wood of the bows where
the ship lay anchored with the evening off-shore breeze and he waited
to see if there would be more lions and he was happy.

The moon had been up for a long time but he slept on and the fish
pulled on steadily and the boat moved into the tunnel of clouds.

He woke with the jerk of his right fist coming up against his face and
the line burning out through his right hand.  He had no feeling of his
left hand but he braked all he could with his right and the line rushed
out.  Finally his left hand found the line and he leaned back against
the line and now it burned his back and his left hand, and his left
hand was taking all the strain and cutting badly.  He looked back at
the coils of line and they were feeding smoothly.  Just then the fish
jumped making a great bursting of the ocean and then a heavy fall.
Then he jumped again and again and the boat was going fast although
line was still racing out and the old man was raising the strain to
breaking point and raising it to breaking point again and again.  He
had been pulled down tight onto the bow and his face was in the cut
slice of dolphin and he could not move.

This is what we waited for, he thought.  So now let us take it.

Make him pay for the line, he thought.  Make him pay for it.

He could not see the fish's jumps but only heard the breaking of the
ocean and the heavy splash as he fell.  The speed of the line was
cutting his hands badly but he had always known this would happen and
he tried to keep the cutting across the calloused parts and not let the
line slip into the palm nor cut the fingers.

If the boy was here he would wet the coils of line, he thought.  Yes.
If the boy were here.  If the boy were here.

The line went out and out and out but it was slowing now and he was
making the fish earn each inch of it.  Now he got his head up from the
wood and out of the slice of fish that his cheek had crushed.  Then he
was on his knees and then he rose slowly to his feet.  He was ceding
line but more slowly all the time.  He worked back to where he could
feel with his foot the coils of line that he could not see.  There was
plenty of line still and now the fish had to pull the friction of all
that new line through the water.

Yes, he thought.  And now he has jumped more than a dozen times and
filled the sacks along his back with air and he cannot go down deep to
die where I cannot bring him up.  He will start circling soon and then
I must work on him.  I wonder what started him so suddenly?  Could it
have been hunger that made him desperate, or was he frightened by
something in the night?  Maybe he suddenly felt fear.  But he was such
a calm, strong fish and he seemed so fearless and so confident.  It is
strange.

"You better be fearless and confident yourself, old man," he said.
"You're holding him again but you cannot get line.  But soon he has to
circle."

The old man held him with his left hand and his shoulders now and
stooped down and scooped up water in his right hand to get the crushed
dolphin flesh off of his face.  He was afraid that it might nauseate
him and he would vomit and lose his strength.  When his face was
cleaned he washed his right hand in the water over the side and then
let it stay in the salt water while he watched the first light come
before the sunrise.  He's headed almost east, he thought.  That means
he is tired and going with the current.  Soon he will have to circle.
Then our true work begins.

After he judged that his right hand had been in the water long enough
he took it out and looked at it.  "It is not bad," he said.  "And pain
does not matter to a man."

He took hold of the line carefully so that it did not fit into any of
the fresh line cuts and shifted his weight so that he could put his
left hand into the sea on the other side of the skiff.

"You did not do so badly for something worthless," he said to his left
hand.  "But there was a moment when I could not find you."

Why was I not born with two good hands? he thought.  Perhaps it was my
fault in not training that one properly.  But God knows he has had
enough chances to learn.  He did not do so badly in the night, though,
and he has only cramped once.  If he cramps again let the line cut him
off.

When he thought that he knew that he was not being clear-headed and he
thought he should chew some more of the dolphin.  But I can't, he told
himself.  It is better to be light-headed than to lose your strength
from nausea.  And I know I cannot keep it if I eat it since my face was
in it.  I will keep it for an emergency until it goes bad.  But it is
too late to try for strength now through nourishment.  You're stupid,
he told himself.  Eat the other flying fish.

It was there, cleaned and ready, and he picked it up with his left hand
and ate it chewing the bones carefully and eating all of it down to the
tail.

It has more nourishment than almost any fish, he thought.  At least the
kind of strength that I need.  Now I have done what I can, he thought.
Let him begin to circle and let the fight come.

The sun was rising for the third time since he had put to sea when the
fish started to circle.

He could not see by the slant of the line that the fish was circling.
It was too early for that.  He just felt a faint slackening of the
pressure of the line and he commenced to pull on it gently with his
right hand.  It tightened, as always, but just when he reached the
point where it would break, line began to come in.  He slipped his
shoulders and head from under the line and began to pull in line
steadily and gently.  He used both of his hands in a swinging motion
and tried to do the pulling as much as he could with his body and his
legs.  His old legs and shoulders pivoted with the swinging of the
pulling.

"It is a very big circle," he said.  "But he is circling."

Then the line would not come in any more and he held it until he saw
the drops jumping from it in the sun.  Then it started out and the old
man knelt down and let it go grudgingly back into the dark water.

"He is making the far part of his circle now," he said.  I must hold
all I can, he thought.  The strain will shorten his circle each time.
Perhaps in an hour I will see him.  Now I must convince him and then I
must kill him.

But the fish kept on circling slowly and the old man was wet with sweat
and tired deep into his bones two hours later.  But the circles were
much shorter now and from the way the line slanted he could tell the
fish had risen steadily while he swam.

For an hour the old man had been seeing black spots before his eyes and
the sweat salted his eyes and salted the cut over his eye and on his
forehead.  He was not afraid of the black spots.  They were normal at
the tension that he was pulling on the line.  Twice, though, he had
felt faint and dizzy and that had worried him.

"I could not fail myself and die on a fish like this," he said.  "Now
that I have him coming so beautifully, God help me endure.  I'll say a
hundred Our Fathers and a hundred Hail Marys.  But I cannot say them
now."

Consider them said, he thought.  I'll say them later.

Just then he felt a sudden banging and jerking on the line he held with
his two hands.  It was sharp and hard-feeling and heavy.

He is hitting the wire leader with his spear, he thought.  That was
bound to come.  He had to do that.  It may make him jump though and I
would rather he stayed circling now.  The jumps were necessary for him
to take air.  But after that each one can widen the opening of the hook
wound and he can throw the hook.

"Don't jump, fish," he said.  "Don't jump."

The fish hit the wire several times more and each time he shook his
head the old man gave up a little line.

I must hold his pain where it is, he thought.  Mine does not matter.  I
can control mine.  But his pain could drive him mad.

After a while the fish stopped beating at the wire and started circling
slowly again.  The old man was gaining line steadily now.  But he felt
faint again.  He lifted some sea water with his left hand and put it on
his head.  Then he put more on and rubbed the back of his neck.

"I have no cramps," he said.  "He'll be up soon and I can last.  You
have to last.  Don't even speak of it."

He kneeled against the bow and, for a moment, slipped the line over his
back again.  I'll rest now while he goes out on the circle and then
stand up and work on him when he comes in, he decided.

It was a great temptation to rest in the bow and let the fish make one
circle by himself without recovering any line.  But when the strain
showed the fish had turned to come toward the boat, the old man rose to
his feet and started the pivoting and the weaving pulling that brought
in all the line he gained.

I'm tireder than I have ever been, he thought, and now the trade wind
is rising.  But that will be good to take him in with.  I need that
badly.

"I'll rest on the next turn as he goes out," he said.  "I feel much
better.  Then in two or three turns more I will have him."

His straw hat was far on the back of his head and he sank down into the
bow with the pull of the line as he felt the fish turn.

You work now, fish, he thought.  I'll take you at the turn.

The sea had risen considerably.  But it was a fair-weather breeze and
he had to have it to get home.

"I'll just steer south and west," he said.  "A man is never lost at sea
and it is a long island."

It was on the third turn that he saw the fish first.

He saw him first as a dark shadow that took so long to pass under the
boat that he could not believe its length.

"No," he said.  "He can't be that big."

But he was that big and at the end of this circle he came to the
surface only thirty yards away and the man saw his tail out of water.
It was higher than a big scythe blade and a very pale lavender above
the dark blue water.  It raked back and as the fish swam just below the
surface the old man could see his huge bulk and the purple stripes that
banded him.  His dorsal fin was down and his huge pectorals were spread
wide.

On this circle the old man could see the fish's eye and the two gray
sucking fish that swam around him.  Sometimes they attached themselves
to him.  Sometimes they darted off.  Sometimes they would swim easily
in his shadow.  They were each over three feet long and when they swam
fast they lashed their whole bodies like eels.

The old man was sweating now but from something else besides the sun.
On each calm placid turn the fish made he was gaining line and he was
sure that in two turns more he would have a chance to get the harpoon
in.

But I must get him close, close, close, he thought.  I mustn't try for
the head.  I must get the heart.

"Be calm and strong, old man," he said.

On the next circle the fish's back was out but he was a little too far
from the boat.  On the next circle he was still too far away but he was
higher out of water and the old man was sure that by gaining some more
line he could have him alongside.

He had rigged his harpoon long before and its coil of light rope was in
a round basket and the end was made fast to the bitt in the bow.

The fish was coming in on his circle now calm and beautiful looking and
only his great tail moving.  The old man pulled on him all that he
could to bring him closer.  For just a moment the fish turned a little
on his side.  Then he straightened himself and began another circle.

"I moved him," the old man said.  "I moved him then."

He felt faint again now but he held on the great fish all the strain
that he could.  I moved him, he thought.  Maybe this time I can get him
over.  Pull, hands, he thought.  Hold up, legs.  Last for me, head.
Last for me.  You never went.  This time I'll pull him over.

But when he put all of his effort on, starting it well out before the
fish came alongside and pulling with all his strength, the fish pulled
part way over and then righted himself and swam away.

"Fish," the old man said.  "Fish, you are going to have to die anyway.
Do you have to kill me too?"

That way nothing is accomplished, he thought.  His mouth was too dry to
speak but he could not reach for the water now.  I must get him
alongside this time, he thought.  I am not good for many more turns.
Yes you are, he told himself.  You're good for ever.

On the next turn, he nearly had him.  But again the fish righted
himself and swam slowly away.

You are killing me, fish, the old man thought.  But you have a right
to.  Never have I seen a greater, or more beautiful, or a calmer or
more noble thing than you, brother.  Come on and kill me.  I do not
care who kills who.

Now you are getting confused in the head, he thought.  You must keep
your head clear.  Keep your head clear and know how to suffer like a
man.  Or a fish, he thought.

"Clear up, head," he said in a voice he could hardly hear.  "Clear up."

Twice more it was the same on the turns.

I do not know, the old man thought.  He had been on the point of
feeling himself go each time.  I do not know.  But I will try it once
more.

He tried it once more and he felt himself going when he turned the
fish.  The fish righted himself and swam off again slowly with the
great tail weaving in the air.

I'll try it again, the old man promised, although his hands were mushy
now and he could only see well in flashes.

He tried it again and it was the same.  So, he thought, and he felt
himself going before he started; I will try it once again.

He took all his pain and what was left of his strength and his long
gone pride and he put it against the fish's agony and the fish came
over onto his side and swam gently on his side, his bill almost
touching the planking of the skiff and started to pass the boat, long,
deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and interminable in the water.

The old man dropped the line and put his foot on it and lifted the
harpoon as high as he could and drove it down with all his strength,
and more strength he had just summoned, into the fish's side just
behind the great chest fin that rose high in the air to the altitude of
the man's chest.  He felt the iron go in and he leaned on it and drove
it further and then pushed all his weight after it.

Then the fish came alive, with his death in him, and rose high out of
the water showing all his great length and width and all his power and
his beauty.  He seemed to hang in the air above the old man in the
skiff.  Then he fell into the water with a crash that sent spray over
the old man and over all of the skiff.

The old man felt faint and sick and he could not see well.  But he
cleared the harpoon line and let it run slowly through his raw hands
and, when he could see, he saw the fish was on his back with his silver
belly up.  The shaft of the harpoon was projecting at an angle from the
fish's shoulder and the sea was discolouring with the red of the blood
from his heart.  First it was dark as a shoal in the blue water that
was more than a mile deep.  Then it spread like a cloud.  The fish was
silvery and still and floated with the waves.

The old man looked carefully in the glimpse of vision that he had.
Then he took two turns of the harpoon line around the bitt in the bow
and laid his head on his hands.

"Keep my head clear," he said against the wood of the bow.  "I am a
tired old man.  But I have killed this fish which is my brother and now
I must do the slave work."

Now I must prepare the nooses and the rope to lash him alongside, he
thought.  Even if we were two and swamped her to load him and bailed
her out, this skiff would never hold him.  I must prepare everything,
then bring him in and lash him well and step the mast and set sail for
home.

He started to pull the fish in to have him alongside so that he could
pass a line through his gills and out his mouth and make his head fast
alongside the bow.  I want to see him, he thought, and to touch and to
feel him.  He is my fortune, he thought.  But that is not why I wish to
feel him.  I think I felt his heart, he thought.  When I pushed on the
harpoon shaft the second time.  Bring him in now and make him fast and
get the noose around his tail and another around his middle to bind him
to the skiff.

"Get to work, old man," he said.  He took a very small drink of the
water.  "There is very much slave work to be done now that the fight is
over."

He looked up at the sky and then out to his fish.  He looked at the sun
carefully.  It is not much more than noon, he thought.  And the trade
wind is rising.  The lines all mean nothing now.  The boy and I will
splice them when we are home.

"Come on, fish," he said.  But the fish did not come.  Instead he lay
there wallowing now in the seas and the old man pulled the skiff up
onto him.

When he was even with him and had the fish's head against the bow he
could not believe his size.  But he untied the harpoon rope from the
bitt, passed it through the fish's gills and out his jaws, made a turn
around his sword then passed the rope through the other gill, made
another turn around the bill and knotted the double rope and made it
fast to the bitt in the bow.  He cut the rope then and went astern to
noose the tail.  The fish had turned silver from his original purple
and silver, and the stripes showed the same pale violet colour as his
tail.  They were wider than a man's hand with his fingers spread and
the fish's eye looked as detached as the mirrors in a periscope or as a
saint in a procession.

"It was the only way to kill him," the old man said.  He was feeling
better since the water and he knew he would not go away and his head
was clear.  He's over fifteen hundred pounds the way he is, he thought.
Maybe much more.  If he dresses out two-thirds of that at thirty cents
a pound?

"I need a pencil for that," he said.  "My head is not that clear.  But
I think the great DiMaggio would be proud of me today.  I had no bone
spurs.  But the hands and the back hurt truly."  I wonder what a bone
spur is, he thought.  Maybe we have them without knowing of it.

He made the fish fast to bow and stern and to the middle thwart.  He
was so big it was like lashing a much bigger skiff alongside.  He cut a
piece of line and tied the fish's lower jaw against his bill so his
mouth would not open and they would sail as cleanly as possible.  Then
he stepped the mast and, with the stick that was his gaff and with his
boom rigged, the patched sail drew, the boat began to move, and half
lying in the stern he sailed south-west.

He did not need a compass to tell him where south-west was.  He only
needed the feel of the trade wind and the drawing of the sail.  I
better put a small line out with a spoon on it and try and get
something to eat and drink for the moisture.  But he could not find a
spoon and his sardines were rotten.  So he hooked a patch of yellow
gulf weed with the gaff as they passed and shook it so that the small
shrimps that were in it fell onto the planking of the skiff.  There
were more than a dozen of them and they jumped and kicked like sand
fleas.  The old man pinched their heads off with his thumb and
forefinger and ate them chewing up the shells and the tails.  They were
very tiny but he knew they were nourishing and they tasted good.

The old man still had two drinks of water in the bottle and he used
half of one after he had eaten the shrimps.  The skiff was sailing well
considering the handicaps and he steered with the tiller under his arm.
He could see the fish and he had only to look at his hands and feel his
back against the stern to know that this had truly happened and was not
a dream.  At one time when he was feeling so badly toward the end, he
had thought perhaps it was a dream.  Then when he had seen the fish
come out of the water and hang motionless in the sky before he fell, he
was sure there was some great strangeness and he could not believe it.
Then he could not see well, although now he saw as well as ever.

Now he knew there was the fish and his hands and back were no dream.
The hands cure quickly, he thought.  I bled them clean and the salt
water will heal them.  The dark water of the true gulf is the greatest
healer that there is.  All I must do is keep the head clear.  The hands
have done their work and we sail well.  With his mouth shut and his
tail straight up and down we sail like brothers.  Then his head started
to become a little unclear and he thought, is he bringing me in or am I
bringing him in?  If I were towing him behind there would be no
question.  Nor if the fish were in the skiff, with all dignity gone,
there would be no question either.  But they were sailing together
lashed side by side and the old man thought, let him bring me in if it
pleases him.  I am only better than him through trickery and he meant
me no harm.

They sailed well and the old man soaked his hands in the salt water and
tried to keep his head clear.  There were high cumulus clouds and
enough cirrus above them so that the old man knew the breeze would last
all night.  The old man looked at the fish constantly to make sure it
was true.  It was an hour before the first shark hit him.

The shark was not an accident.  He had come up from deep down in the
water as the dark cloud of blood had settled and dispersed in the mile
deep sea.  He had come up so fast and absolutely without caution that
he broke the surface of the blue water and was in the sun.  Then he
fell back into the sea and picked up the scent and started swimming on
the course the skiff and the fish had taken.

Sometimes he lost the scent.  But he would pick it up again, or have
just a trace of it, and he swam fast and hard on the course.  He was a
very big Mako shark built to swim as fast as the fastest fish in the
sea and everything about him was beautiful except his jaws.

His back was as blue as a sword fish's and his belly was silver and his
hide was smooth and handsome.  He was built as a sword fish except for
his huge jaws which were tight shut now as he swam fast, just under the
surface with his high dorsal fin knifing through the water without
wavering.  Inside the closed double lip of his jaws all of his eight
rows of teeth were slanted inwards.  They were not the ordinary
pyramid-shaped teeth of most sharks.  They were shaped like a man's
fingers when they are crisped like claws.  They were nearly as long as
the fingers of the old man and they had razor-sharp cutting edges on
both sides.  This was a fish built to feed on all the fishes in the
sea, that were so fast and strong and well armed that they had no other
enemy.  Now he speeded up as he smelled the fresher scent and his blue
dorsal fin cut the water.

When the old man saw him coming he knew that this was a shark that had
no fear at all and would do exactly what he wished.  He prepared the
harpoon and made the rope fast while he watched the shark come on.  The
rope was short as it lacked what he had cut away to lash the fish.

The old man's head was clear and good now and he was full of resolution
but he had little hope.  It was too good to last, he thought.  He took
one look at the great fish as he watched the shark close in.  It might
as well have been a dream, he thought.  I cannot keep him from hitting
me but maybe I can get him.  _Dentuso_, he thought.  Bad luck to your
mother.

The shark closed fast astern and when he hit the fish the old man saw
his mouth open and his strange eyes and the clicking chop of the teeth
as he drove forward in the meat just above the tail.  The shark's head
was out of water and his back was coming out and the old man could hear
the noise of skin and flesh ripping on the big fish when he rammed the
harpoon down onto the shark's head at a spot where the line between his
eyes intersected with the line that ran straight back from his nose.
There were no such lines.  There was only the heavy sharp blue head and
the big eyes and the clicking, thrusting all-swallowing jaws.  But that
was the location of the brain and the old man hit it.  He hit it with
his blood mushed hands driving a good harpoon with all his strength.
He hit it without hope but with resolution and complete malignancy.

The shark swung over and the old man saw his eye was not alive and then
he swung over once again, wrapping himself in two loops of the rope.
The old man knew that he was dead but the shark would not accept it.
Then, on his back, with his tail lashing and his jaws clicking, the
shark plowed over the water as a speed-boat does.  The water was white
where his tail beat it and three-quarters of his body was clear above
the water when the rope came taut, shivered, and then snapped.  The
shark lay quietly for a little while on the surface and the old man
watched him.  Then he went down very slowly.

"He took about forty pounds," the old man said aloud.  He took my
harpoon too and all the rope, he thought, and now my fish bleeds again
and there will be others.

He did not like to look at the fish anymore since he had been
mutilated.  When the fish had been hit it was as though he himself were
hit.

But I killed the shark that hit my fish, he thought.  And he was the
biggest _dentuso_ that I have ever seen.  And God knows that I have
seen big ones.

It was too good to last, he thought.  I wish it had been a dream now
and that I had never hooked the fish and was alone in bed on the
newspapers.

"But man is not made for defeat," he said.  "A man can be destroyed but
not defeated."  I am sorry that I killed the fish though, he thought.
Now the bad time is coming and I do not even have the harpoon.  The
_dentuso_ is cruel and able and strong and intelligent.  But I was more
intelligent that he was.  Perhaps not, he thought.  Perhaps I was only
better armed.

"Don't think, old man," he said aloud.  "Sail on this course and take
it when it comes."

But I must think, he thought.  Because it is all I have left.  That and
baseball.  I wonder how the great DiMaggio would have liked the way I
hit him in the brain?  It was no great thing, he thought.  Any man
could do it.  But do you think my hands were as great a handicap as the
bone spurs?  I cannot know.  I never had anything wrong with my heel
except the time the sting ray stung it when I stepped on him when
swimming and paralyzed the lower leg and made the unbearable pain.

"Think about something cheerful, old man," he said.  "Every minute now
you are closer to home.  You sail lighter for the loss of forty pounds."

He knew quite well the pattern of what could happen when he reached the
inner part of the current.  But there was nothing to be done now.

"Yes there is," he said aloud.  "I can lash my knife to the butt of one
of the oars."

So he did that with the tiller under his arm and the sheet of the sail
under his foot.

"Now," he said.  "I am still an old man.  But I am not unarmed."

The breeze was fresh now and he sailed on well.  He watched only the
forward part of the fish and some of his hope returned.

It is silly not to hope, he thought.  Besides I believe it is a sin.
Do not think about sin, he thought.  There are enough problems now
without sin.  Also I have no understanding of it.

I have no understanding of it and I am not sure that I believe in it.
Perhaps it was a sin to kill the fish.  I suppose it was even though I
did it to keep me alive and feed many people.  But then everything is a
sin.  Do not think about sin.  It is much too late for that and there
are people who are paid to do it.  Let them think about it.  You were
born to be a fisherman as the fish was born to be a fish.  San Pedro
was a fisherman as was the father of the great DiMaggio.

But he liked to think about all things that he was involved in and
since there was nothing to read and he did not have a radio, he thought
much and he kept on thinking about sin.  You did not kill the fish only
to keep alive and to sell for food, he thought.  You killed him for
pride and because you are a fisherman.  You loved him when he was alive
and you loved him after.  It you love him, it is not a sin to kill him.
Or is it more?

"You think too much, old man," he said aloud.

But you enjoyed killing the _dentuso_, he thought.  He lives on the
live fish as you do.  He is not a scavenger nor just a moving appetite
as some sharks are.  He is beautiful and noble and knows no fear of
anything.

"I killed him in self-defense," the old man said aloud.  "And I killed
him well."

Besides, he thought, everything kills everything else in some way.
Fishing kills me exactly as it keeps me alive.  The boy keeps me alive,
he thought.  I must not deceive myself too much.

He leaned over the side and pulled loose a piece of the meat of the
fish where the shark had cut him.  He chewed it and noted its quality
and its good taste.  It was firm and juicy, like meat, but it was not
red.  There was no stringiness in it and he knew that it would bring
the highest price in the market.  But there was no way to keep its
scent out of the water and the old man knew that a very bad time was
coming.

The breeze was steady.  It had backed a little further into the
north-east and he knew that meant that it would not fall off.  The old
man looked ahead of him but he could see no sails nor could he see the
hull nor the smoke of any ship.  There were only the flying fish that
went up from his bow sailing away to either side and the yellow patches
of gulf-weed.  He could not even see a bird.

He had sailed for two hours, resting in the stern and sometimes chewing
a bit of the meat from the marlin, trying to rest and to be strong,
when he saw the first of the two sharks.

"_Ay_," he said aloud.  There is no translation for this word and
perhaps it is just a noise such as a man might make, involuntarily,
feeling the nail go through his hands and into the wood.

"_Galanos_," he said aloud.  He had seen the second fin now coming up
behind the first and had identified them as shovel-nosed sharks by the
brown, triangular fin and the sweeping movements of the tail.  They had
the scent and were excited and in the stupidity of their great hunger
they were losing and finding the scent in their excitement.  But they
were closing all the time.

The old man made the sheet fast and jammed the tiller.  Then he took up
the oar with the knife lashed to it.  He lifted it as lightly as he
could because his hands rebelled at the pain.  Then he opened and
closed them on it lightly to loosen them.  He closed them firmly so
they would take the pain now and would not flinch and watched the
sharks come.  He could see their wide, flattened, shovel-pointed heads
now and their white-tipped wide pectoral fins.  They were hateful
sharks, bad smelling, scavengers as well as killers, and when they were
hungry they would bite at an oar or the rudder of a boat.  It was these
sharks that would cut the turtles' legs and flippers off when the
turtles were asleep on the surface, and they would hit a man in the
water, if they were hungry, even if the man had no smell of fish blood
nor of fish slime on him.

"_Ay_," the old man said.  "_Galanos_.  Come on, _Galanos_."

They came.  But they did not come as the Mako had come.  One turned and
went out of sight under the skiff and the old man could feel the skiff
shake as he jerked and pulled on the fish.  The other watched the old
man with his slitted yellow eyes and then came in fast with his half
circle of jaws wide to hit the fish where he had already been bitten.
The line showed clearly on the top of his brown head and back where the
brain joined the spinal cord and the old man drove the knife on the oar
into the juncture, withdrew it, and drove it in again into the shark's
yellow cat-like eyes.  The shark let go of the fish and slid down,
swallowing what he had taken as he died.

The skiff was still shaking with the destruction the other shark was
doing to the fish and the old man let go the sheet so that the skiff
would swing broadside and bring the shark out from under.  When he saw
the shark he leaned over the side and punched at him.  He hit only meat
and the hide was set hard and he barely got the knife in.  The blow
hurt not only his hands but his shoulder too.  But the shark came up
fast with his head out and the old man hit him squarely in the center
of his flat-topped head as his nose came out of water and lay against
the fish.  The old man withdrew the blade and punched the shark exactly
in the same spot again.  He still hung to the fish with his jaws hooked
and the old man stabbed him in his left eye.  The shark still hung
there.

"No?" the old man said and he drove the blade between the vertebrae and
the brain.  It was an easy shot now and he felt the cartilage sever.
The old man reversed the oar and put the blade between the shark's jaws
to open them.  He twisted the blade and as the shark slid loose he
said, "Go on, _galano_.  Slide down a mile deep.  Go see your friend,
or maybe it's your mother."

The old man wiped the blade of his knife and laid down the oar.  Then
he found the sheet and the sail filled and he brought the skiff onto
her course.

"They must have taken a quarter of him and of the best meat," he said
aloud.  "I wish it were a dream and that I had never hooked him.  I'm
sorry about it, fish.  It makes everything wrong."  He stopped and he
did not want to look at the fish now.  Drained of blood and awash he
looked the colour of the silver backing of a mirror and his stripes
still showed.

"I shouldn't have gone out so far, fish," he said.  "Neither for you
nor for me.  I'm sorry, fish."

Now, he said to himself.  Look to the lashing on the knife and see if
it has been cut.  Then get your hand in order because there still is
more to come.

"I wish I had a stone for the knife," the old man said after he had
checked the lashing on the oar butt.  "I should have brought a stone."
You should have brought many things, he thought.  But you did not bring
them, old man.  Now is no time to think of what you do not have.  Think
of what you can do with what there is.

"You give me much good counsel," he said aloud.  "I'm tired of it."

He held the tiller under his arm and soaked both his hands in the water
as the skiff drove forward.

"God knows how much that last one took," he said.  "But she's much
lighter now."  He did not want to think of the mutilated under-side of
the fish.  He knew that each of the jerking bumps of the shark had been
meat torn away and that the fish now made a trail for all sharks as
wide as a highway through the sea.

He was a fish to keep a man all winter, he thought.  Don't think of
that.  Just rest and try to get your hands in shape to defend what is
left of him.  The blood smell from my hands means nothing now with all
that scent in the water.  Besides they do not bleed much.  There is
nothing cut that means anything.  The bleeding may keep the left from
cramping.

What can I think of now? he thought.  Nothing.  I must think of nothing
and wait for the next ones.  I wish it had really been a dream, he
thought.  But who knows?  It might have turned out well.

The next shark that came was a single shovel-nose.  He came like a pig
to the trough if a pig had a mouth so wide that you could put your head
in it.  The old man let him hit the fish and then drove the knife on
the oar down into his brain.  But the shark jerked backwards as he
rolled and the knife blade snapped.

The old man settled himself to steer.  He did not even watch the big
shark sinking slowly in the water, showing first life-size, then small,
then tiny.  That always fascinated the old man.  But he did not even
watch it now.

"I have the gaff now," he said.  "But it will do no good.  I have the
two oars and the tiller and the short club."

Now they have beaten me, he thought.  I am too old to club sharks to
death.  But I will try it as long as I have the oars and the short club
and the tiller.

He put his hands in the water again to soak them.  It was getting late
in the afternoon and he saw nothing but the sea and the sky.  There was
more wind in the sky than there had been, and soon he hoped that he
would see land.

"You're tired, old man," he said.  "You're tired inside."

The sharks did not hit him again until just before sunset.

The old man saw the brown fins coming along the wide trail the fish
must make in the water.  They were not even quartering on the scent.
They were headed straight for the skiff swimming side by side.

He jammed the tiller, made the sheet fast and reached under the stern
for the club.  It was an oar handle from a broken oar sawed off to
about two and a half feet in length.  He could only use it effectively
with one hand because of the grip of the handle and he took good hold
of it with his right hand, flexing his hand on it, as he watched the
sharks come.  They were both _galanos_.

I must let the first one get a good hold and hit him on the point of
the nose or straight across the top of the head, he thought.

The two sharks closed together and as he saw the one nearest him open
his jaws and sink them into the silver side of the fish, he raised the
club high and brought it down heavy and slamming onto the top of the
shark's broad head.  He felt the rubbery solidity as the club came
down.  But he felt the rigidity of bone too and he struck the shark
once more hard across the point of the nose as he slid down from the
fish.

The other shark had been in and out and now came in again with his jaws
wide.  The old man could see pieces of the meat of the fish spilling
white from the corner of his jaws as he bumped the fish and closed his
jaws.  He swung at him and hit only the head and the shark looked at
him and wrenched the meat loose.  The old man swung the club down on
him again as he slipped away to swallow and hit only the heavy solid
rubberiness.

"Come on, _galano_," the old man said.  "Come in again."

The shark came in a rush and the old man hit him as he shut his jaws.
He hit him solidly and from as high up as he could raise the club.
This time he felt the bone at the base of the brain and he hit him
again in the same place while the shark tore the meat loose sluggishly
and slid down from the fish.

The old man watched for him to come again but neither shark showed.
Then he saw one on the surface swimming in circles.  He did not see the
fin of the other.

I could not expect to kill them, he thought.  I could have in my time.
But I have hurt them both badly and neither one can feel very good.  If
I could have used a bat with two hands I could have killed the first
one surely.  Even now, he thought.

He did not want to look at the fish.  He knew that half of him had been
destroyed.  The sun had gone down while he had been in the fight with
the sharks.

"It will be dark soon," he said.  "Then I should see the glow of
Havana.  If I am too far to the eastward I will see the lights of one
of the new beaches."

I cannot be too far out now, he thought.  I hope no one has been too
worried.  There is only the boy to worry, of course.  But I am sure he
would have confidence.  Many of the older fishermen will worry.  Many
others too, he thought.  I live in a good town.

He could not talk to the fish anymore because the fish had been ruined
too badly.  Then something came into his head.

"Half fish," he said.  "Fish that you were.  I am sorry that I went too
far out.  I ruined us both.  But we have killed many sharks, you and I,
and ruined many others.  How many did you ever kill, old fish?  You do
not have that spear on your head for nothing."

He liked to think of the fish and what he could do to a shark if he
were swimming free.  I should have chopped the bill off to fight them
with, he thought.  But there was no hatchet and then there was no knife.

But if I had, and could have lashed it to an oar butt, what a weapon.
Then we might have fought them together.  What will you do now if they
come in the night?  What can you do?

"Fight them," he said.  "I'll fight them until I die."

But in the dark now and no glow showing and no lights and only the wind
and the steady pull of the sail he felt that perhaps he was already
dead.  He put his two hands together and felt the palms.  They were not
dead and he could bring the pain of life by simply opening and closing
them.  He leaned his back against the stern and knew he was not dead.
His shoulders told him.

I have all those prayers I promised if I caught the fish, he thought.
But I am too tired to say them now.  I better get the sack and put it
over my shoulders.

He lay in the stern and steered and watched for the glow to come in the
sky.  I have half of him, he thought.  Maybe I'll have the luck to
bring the forward half in.  I should have some luck.  No, he said.  You
violated your luck when you went too far outside.

"Don't be silly," he said aloud.  "And keep awake and steer.  You may
have much luck yet."

"I'd like to buy some if there's any place they sell it," he said.

What could I buy it with? he asked himself.  Could I buy it with a lost
harpoon and a broken knife and two bad hands?

"You might," he said.  "You tried to buy it with eighty-four days at
sea.  They nearly sold it to you too."

I must not think nonsense, he thought.  Luck is a thing that comes in
many forms and who can recognize her?  I would take some though in any
form and pay what they asked.  I wish I could see the glow from the
lights, he thought.  I wish too many things.  But that is the thing I
wish for now.  He tried to settle more comfortably to steer and from
his pain he knew he was not dead.

He saw the reflected glare of the lights of the city at what must have
been around ten o'clock at night.  They were only perceptible at first
as the light is in the sky before the moon rises.  Then they were
steady to see across the ocean which was rough now with the increasing
breeze.  He steered inside of the glow and he thought that now, soon,
he must hit the edge of the stream.

Now it is over, he thought.  They will probably hit me again.  But what
can a man do against them in the dark without a weapon?

He was stiff and sore now and his wounds and all of the strained parts
of his body hurt with the cold of the night.  I hope I do not have to
fight again, he thought.  I hope so much I do not have to fight again.

But by midnight he fought and this time he knew the fight was useless.
They came in a pack and he could only see the lines in the water that
their fins made and their phosphorescence as they threw themselves on
the fish.  He clubbed at heads and heard the jaws chop and the shaking
of the skiff as they took hold below.  He clubbed desperately at what
he could only feel and hear and he felt something seize the club and it
was gone.

He jerked the tiller free from the rudder and beat and chopped with it,
holding it in both hands and driving it down again and again.  But they
were up to the bow now and driving in one after the other and together,
tearing off the pieces of meat that showed glowing below the sea as
they turned to come once more.

One came, finally, against the head itself and he knew that it was
over.  He swung the tiller across the shark's head where the jaws were
caught in the heaviness of the fish's head which would not tear.  He
swung it once and twice and again.  He heard the tiller break and he
lunged at the shark with the splintered butt.  He felt it go in and
knowing it was sharp he drove it in again.  The shark let go and rolled
away.  That was the last shark of the pack that came.  There was
nothing more for them to eat.

The old man could hardly breathe now and he felt a strange taste in his
mouth.  It was coppery and sweet and he was afraid of it for a moment.
But there was not much of it.

He spat into the ocean and said, "Eat that, _Galanos_.  And make a
dream you've killed a man."

He knew he was beaten now finally and without remedy and he went back
to the stern and found the jagged end of the tiller would fit in the
slot of the rudder well enough for him to steer.  He settled the sack
around his shoulders and put the skiff on her course.  He sailed
lightly now and he had no thoughts nor any feelings of any kind.  He
was past everything now and he sailed the skiff to make his home port
as well and as intelligently as he could.  In the night sharks hit the
carcass as someone might pick up crumbs from the table.  The old man
paid no attention to them and did not pay any attention to anything
except steering.  He only noticed how lightly and how well the skiff
sailed now there was no great weight beside her.

She's good, he thought.  She is sound and not harmed in any way except
for the tiller.  That is easily replaced.

He could feel he was inside the current now and he could see the lights
of the beach colonies along the shore.  He knew where he was now and it
was nothing to get home.

The wind is our friend, anyway, he thought.  Then he added, sometimes.
And the great sea with our friends and our enemies.  And bed, he
thought.  Bed is my friend.  Just bed, he thought.  Bed will be a great
thing.  It is easy when you are beaten, he thought.  I never knew how
easy it was.  And what beat you, he thought.

"Nothing," he said aloud.  "I went out too far."

When he sailed into the little harbour the lights of the Terrace were
out and he knew everyone was in bed.  The breeze had risen steadily and
was blowing strongly now.  It was quiet in the harbour though and he
sailed up onto the little patch of shingle below the rocks.  There was
no one to help him so he pulled the boat up as far as he could.  Then
he stepped out and made her fast to a rock.

He unstepped the mast and furled the sail and tied it.  Then he
shouldered the mast and started to climb.  It was then he knew the
depth of his tiredness.  He stopped for a moment and looked back and
saw in the reflection from the street light the great tail of the fish
standing up well behind the skiff's stern.  He saw the white naked line
of his backbone and the dark mass of the head with the projecting bill
and all the nakedness between.

He started to climb again and at the top he fell and lay for some time
with the mast across his shoulder.  He tried to get up.  But it was too
difficult and he sat there with the mast on his shoulder and looked at
the road.  A cat passed on the far side going about its business and
the old man watched it.  Then he just watched the road.

Finally he put the mast down and stood up.  He picked the mast up and
put it on his shoulder and started up the road.  He had to sit down
five times before he reached his shack.

Inside the shack he leaned the mast against the wall.  In the dark he
found a water bottle and took a drink.  Then he lay down on the bed.
He pulled the blanket over his shoulders and then over his back and
legs and he slept face down on the newspapers with his arms out
straight and the palms of his hands up.

He was asleep when the boy looked in the door in the morning.  It was
blowing so hard that the drifting-boats would not be going out and the
boy had slept late and then come to the old man's shack as he had come
each morning.  The boy saw that the old man was breathing and then he
saw the old man's hands and he started to cry.  He went out very
quietly to go to bring some coffee and all the way down the road he was
crying.

Many fishermen were around the skiff looking at what was lashed beside
it and one was in the water, his trousers rolled up, measuring the
skeleton with a length of line.

The boy did not go down.  He had been there before and one of the
fishermen was looking after the skiff for him.

"How is he?" one of the fishermen shouted.

"Sleeping," the boy called.  He did not care that they saw him crying.
"Let no one disturb him."

"He was eighteen feet from nose to tail," the fisherman who was
measuring him called.

"I believe it," the boy said.

He went into the Terrace and asked for a can of coffee.

"Hot and with plenty of milk and sugar in it."

"Anything more?"

"No.  Afterwards I will see what he can eat."

"What a fish it was," the proprietor said.  "There has never been such
a fish.  Those were two fine fish you took yesterday too."

"Damn my fish," the boy said and he started to cry again.

"Do you want a drink of any kind?" the proprietor asked.

"No," the boy said.  "Tell them not to bother Santiago.  I'll be back."

"Tell him how sorry I am."

"Thanks," the boy said.

The boy carried the hot can of coffee up to the old man's shack and sat
by him until he woke.  Once it looked as though he were waking.  But he
had gone back into heavy sleep and the boy had gone across the road to
borrow some wood to heat the coffee.

Finally the old man woke.

"Don't sit up," the boy said.  "Drink this."  He poured some of the
coffee in a glass.

The old man took it and drank it.

"They beat me, Manolin," he said.  "They truly beat me."

"He didn't beat you.  Not the fish."

"No.  Truly.  It was afterwards."

"Pedrico is looking after the skiff and the gear.  What do you want
done with the head?"

"Let Pedrico chop it up to use in fish traps."

"And the spear?"

"You keep it if you want it."

"I want it," the boy said.  "Now we must make our plans about the other
things."

"Did they search for me?"

"Of course.  With coast guard and with planes."

"The ocean is very big and a skiff is small and hard to see," the old
man said.  He noticed how pleasant it was to have someone to talk to
instead of speaking only to himself and to the sea.  "I missed you," he
said.  "What did you catch?"

"One the first day.  One the second and two the third."

"Very good."

"Now we fish together again."

"No.  I am not lucky.  I am not lucky anymore."

"The hell with luck," the boy said.  "I'll bring the luck with me."

"What will your family say?"

"I do not care.  I caught two yesterday.  But we will fish together now
for I still have much to learn."

"We must get a good killing lance and always have it on board.  You can
make the blade from a spring leaf from an old Ford.  We can grind it in
Guanabacoa.  It should be sharp and not tempered so it will break.  My
knife broke."

"I'll get another knife and have the spring ground.  How many days of
heavy _brisa_ have we?"

"Maybe three.  Maybe more."

"I will have everything in order," the boy said.  "You get your hands
well old man."

"I know how to care for them.  In the night I spat something strange
and felt something in my chest was broken."

"Get that well too," the boy said.  "Lie down, old man, and I will
bring you your clean shirt.  And something to eat."

"Bring any of the papers of the time that I was gone," the old man said.

"You must get well fast for there is much that I can learn and you can
teach me everything.  How much did you suffer?"

"Plenty," the old man said.

"I'll bring the food and the papers," the boy said.  "Rest well, old
man.  I will bring stuff from the drug-store for your hands."

"Don't forget to tell Pedrico the head is his."

"No.  I will remember."

As the boy went out the door and down the worn coral rock road he was
crying again.

That afternoon there was a party of tourists at the Terrace and looking
down in the water among the empty beer cans and dead barracudas a woman
saw a great long white spine with a huge tail at the end that lifted
and swung with the tide while the east wind blew a heavy steady sea
outside the entrance to the harbour.

"What's that?" she asked a waiter and pointed to the long backbone of
the great fish that was now just garbage waiting to go out with the
tide.

"Tiburon," the waiter said, "Eshark."  He was meaning to explain what
had happened.

"I didn't know sharks had such handsome, beautifully formed tails."

"I didn't either," her male companion said.

Up the road, in his shack, the old man was sleeping again.  He was
still sleeping on his face and the boy was sitting by him watching him.
The old man was dreaming about the lions.




_BOOKS BY_

ERNEST HEMINGWAY


  THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA
  ACROSS THE RIVER AND INTO THE TREES
  FOR WHOM THE BELL TOLLS
  THE FIFTH COLUMN
      AND
  THE FIRST FORTY-NINE STORIES
  TO HAVE AND HAVE NOT
  GREEN HILLS OF AFRICA
  WINNER TAKE NOTHING
  DEATH IN THE AFTERNOON
  A FAREWELL TO ARMS
  MEN WITHOUT WOMEN
  THE SUN ALSO RISES
  THE TORRENTS OF SPRING
  IN OUR TIME


_CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS_




[End of The Old Man and the Sea, by Ernest Hemingway]
</doc>
<doc id="file22688795" filename="Memoirs of a Geisha by Arthur Golden.txt" parent_folder="upload">
CHAPTER ONE



The Little Fish Girl



I wasn't born and brought up to be a Kyoto geisha. I wasn't even born in Kyoto. I'm a fisherman's daughter from a little town called Yoroido on the Sea of Japan. We lived in a tiny house, high above the sea, and my father smelled like the sea even after he washed.



One day, many years ago, I was entertaining at a party in Kyoto and a man said he was in Yoroido only last week. I felt like a bird that has flown across the ocean and finds another bird that knows its nest. I couldn't stop myself-I said:



"Yoroido! That's where I grew up."

The man didn't believe me.

"You can't mean it," he said, and laughed. "You, growing up in Yoroido! That's like making tea in a bucket."

Well, I'd never thought of Yoroido as a bucket, though it's not pretty. In those days, the early 1930s, it had only one road leading to the Japan Coastal Seafood Company, which sold all the fish that my father and the other fishermen caught.

My father was a very old man. I was twelve then, but from the day I was born I never looked like him at all. I always looked like my mother. We had the same strange eyes; you hardly ever saw eyes like ours in Japan. Instead of being dark brown like everyone rise's, my mother's eyes were a shining gray and mine are just the same. It's the water in both our personalities. My father had wood in his personality; mother and I were full of water.

But all the water was running out of mother because of her illness. You could see every bone in her face getting harder and harder as the water dried out. Dr. Miura visited her every time he came to our village.

"Chiyo-chan," my father would say to me, "get the doctor a cup of tea."

My name back then was Chiyo. It was many years before I was known by my geisha name, Sayuri.

"Sakamoto-san," said the doctor to my father, one time, "you need to have a talk with one of the women in the village. Ask them to make a new dress for your wife. She shouldn't die in that old dress she's wearing."

"So she's going to die soon?" asked my father.

"A few more weeks, maybe," said Dr. Miura.

After that I couldn't hear their voices for a time. And then... "I thought I'd die first," my father was saying.



"You're an old man, Sakamoto-san. But you might have another year or two."



One afternoon I came home from school and found Mr. Tanaka Ichiro walking up the path to my house. Mr. Tanaka's family owned the Japan Coastal Seafood Company. He didn't wear peasant clothes like the fishermen. He wore a man's kimono with kimono pants.

"Ah, Chiyo," said Mr. Tanaka. "Dr. Miura told me that your mother's sick. Give her this." He handed me a packet wrapped in rice paper, about the size of a fish head. "It's Chinese medicine," he told me. "Don't listen to Dr. Miura if he says it's worthless."

He turned to go but then turned back again. "I know a man," he said. "He's older now, but when he was a boy about your age, his father died. The following year his mother died. Sounds a bit like you, don't you think?"

Mr. Tanaka gave me a look that meant I had to agree with him. "Well, that man's name is Tanaka Ichiro," he continued. "I was taken in by the Tanaka family at the age of twelve. They gave me a new start."

The next day I came home from school and found Mr. Tanaka sitting across from my father at the little table in our house.

"So, Sakamoto, what do you think of my idea?"

"I don't know, sir," said my father. "I can't imagine Chiyo living anywhere else."



Part of me hoped desperately that Mr. Tanaka would adopt me, but I was also ashamed that I wanted to live anywhere except my little house above the sea. As Mr. Tanaka left, I heard my father crying.



The next day Mr. Tanaka came to collect me in a little cart pulled by two horses. I thought we were going to his house but we drove to the train station. A tall, thin man met us there.

"This is Mr. Bekku," said Mr. Tanaka. And then he drove away again. Mr. Bekku gave me a look of disgust.

"Fish! Ugh! You smell of fish," he said.

When the train came, Mr. Bekku and I got on. As soon as we sat down he took out a comb and started pulling it through my hair. It hurt a lot and although I tried not to cry, in the end I did.

Then he stopped doing it. The train went on and on, away from my home.

"Where are we going?" I asked, after a time.

"Kyoto," said Mr. Bekku. It was the only word he said to me on the long train journey. Kyoto sounded as foreign to me as Hong Kong or even New York, which I'd once heard Dr. Miura talk about.

I could see little of the city as we neared Kyoto station, but then I was astonished to see rooftop after rooftop, all touching, as far as the distant hills. I could never have imagined a city so huge.

Back in the 1930s there were still rickshaws in Kyoto. Mr. Bekku led me by the elbow and we climbed into a rickshaw. "Cion," Mr. Bekku said to the rickshaw driver. It was the first time I ever heard the name of the famous geisha area of Kyoto.

I fell back in the seat as the rickshaw driver picked up the poles and ran through the streets.

"Won't you please tell me where I'm going?" I said to Mr. Bekku.

For a moment I thought he wasn't going to reply. Then he said, "To your new home."

Soon we turned onto a street that seemed as broad as the whole village of Yoroido. I could hardly see the other side because of all the people, bicycles, cars, and trucks. I'd never seen a car or a truck before-except in photographs.

After a long time the rickshaw turned down an alley of wooden houses. We stopped and Mr. Bekku told me to get out. There in the doorway stood the most beautiful woman I'd ever seen, wearing a kimono more perfect than anything I'd ever imagined. It was water blue with white lines that curled like the current in a stream when she moved. It was pure silk. And her clothing wasn't the only extraordinary thing about her; her face was painted a kind of rich white, like a cloud lit by the sun.

This was Hatsumomo. I didn't know it then but she was one of the most famous geisha in Gion. She was a tiny woman; even with her black, shiny hair up high she came only to Mr. Bekku's shoulder.

"Mr. Bekku," said Hatsumomo. "What is that strong smell of fish? Could you take the garbage out later, please. I want to pass by."

There was no garbage there; she was talking about me.



Mr. Bekku led me past Hatsumomo into the small, elegant house. It was built up on stones, with enough space under it for a cat to crawl under. Inside, the hall had a wooden floor that shone in the yellow light of electric lamps. A door slid back and a woman came out, smoking a pipe.



"This is the new girl, Mrs. Nitta," said Mr. Bekku.

"Ah, yes. The little fish girl," said the woman. "Come closer, I want to have a look at you. Heavens! What amazing eyes! You're a beautiful girl, aren't you?"

She spoke with the same peculiar accent as Mr. Bekku and Hatsumomo. It sounded so different from the Japanese spoken in my village that I had a hard time understanding her. I couldn't look at her, so I kept my eyes down on the wooden floor.

"There's no need to worry, little girl. No one's going to cook you. My name is Mrs. Nitta and this is the Nitta okiya."



I raised my eyes a little. Her kimono was yellow, with smooth, brown branches carrying lovely green and orange leaves. It was made of the most beautiful, delicate, thin silk. Then I raised my eyes higher and almost cried out in shock. The colors of her face were all wrong. Her eyelids were red like meat and her gums and tongue were gray. I later learned that this was due to a problem with her diet, but at the time I just stared in horror.



"What are you looking at?" said Mrs. Nitta, as smoke from her pipe rose from her face.

"I'm very sorry, ma'am. I was looking at your kimono," I told her. "I don't think I've ever seen anything like it."

This must have been the right answer-if there was a right answer - because she laughed, though the laugh sounded like a cough.

"So you like it, do you," she said, continuing to cough or laugh, I didn't know which. "Do you have any idea what it cost?"

"No, ma'am."

"More than you did, that's certain."

A young girl came out into the hall, carrying a wooden bucket full of water. She was a little older than me, thirteen or fourteen. Her body was thin, but her face was round. Even when she was a geisha in Gion many years later, everybody called her Pumpkin.

"Ah, Pumpkin," said Mrs. Nitta. "Get the little fish girl clean and get her out of those peasant clothes."

"Yes, ma'am," said Pumpkin.

She led me through the hall to a courtyard in the back. The bucket was heavy for her and when she put it down half the water spilled out over the dirt floor.

"Where on earth did you come from?" she said.

I didn't want to say I'd come from Yoroido. Pumpkin's accent was as strange to me as everybody else's. I was sure she wouldn't know where Yoroido was. I said instead that I'd just arrived.

"I thought I'd never see another girl my age," she said to me. "Why are your eyes that color?"

I didn't answer that, but took my clothes off so Pumpkin could wash me with a cloth she took out of the bucket. After that, she went to a room in the courtyard and got me a kimono. It was made of rough cotton in a simple dark blue pattern, but it was certainly more elegant than anything I'd worn before.

"I don't even want to know your name yet," said Pumpkin. "I have to learn new names all the time. Mrs. Nitta didn't like the last girl who came and she was only here a month."

"What will happen if they don't want to keep me?"

"It's better for you if they keep you."

"Why? What... what is this place?"

"It's an okiya. It's where geisha live. Our geisha is called Hatsumomo and we look after her and do everything for her. She earns all the money for the okiya. If you work very hard, you'll grow up to be a geisha yourself. But it takes years of training."

I had a sudden image in my mind of my poor, sick mother in bed, pushing herself up on one elbow and looking around to see where I'd gone. Tears came into my eyes before I could think how to stop them.





CHAPTER TWO



No Escape



During those first few weeks in that strange place, I couldn't have felt worse if I'd lost my arms and legs, rather than my family and my home. I was confused and miserable, and I had no doubt that life would never again be the same.



But, strangely, during all that time, I felt an unreasonable warmth for Mrs. Nitta-something like the feeling that a fish might have for the fisherman who pulls the hook from its lip. Probably this was because I saw her no more than a few minutes each day while cleaning her room. She was always there, sitting at the table with an account book open in front her. The accounts were always organized, but nothing else was. She was messier even than Hatsumomo.



Hatsumomo lived like a queen in the okiya because she earned the income from which we all lived. And honestly, I've never seen a more astonishing-looking woman. Men in the street sometimes stopped and took their cigarettes from their mouths to stare at her.

Her room was the largest in the okiya, larger than my entire house in Yoroido. At first, I didn't understand why it was so much bigger even than Mrs. Nitta's. Then Pumpkin told me that in the past there'd been three or four geisha in the okiya and they'd all slept together in that one room, but Hatsumomo was the only geisha in the okiya now.

I always tried to clean the room as soon as Hatsumomo left for her dance lessons. I was worried about what might happen if she came back and found me alone in there. I hardly saw her because of the busy life she led, but I was still terrified of her.

One day, when I'd been in the okiya about a month, Mrs. Nitta led me upstairs to Hatsumomo's room, to watch her put on her make-up.

Before we went in, Mrs. Nitta warned me not to get in Hatsumomo's way. This is because, without her make-up, a geisha is like any other woman. She only becomes a geisha when she sits in front of her mirror to put her make-up on. And I don't just mean that this is when she begins to look like a geisha; this is when she begins to think like one too.

Hatsumomo told me to sit to the side of her and just behind. From there, I could see her face in the tiny mirror on her makeup table. She had half a dozen make-up brushes of different sizes and shapes. She told me what they were all called and how to use them.

"Now, why do you suppose I've shown you these things?" she said.

"So I'll understand how you put on your make-up," I said.

"Heavens, no! I've shown them to you so you'll see there isn't any magic to it. How sad for you! Because it means that make-up alone won't be enough to change the little fish girl into something beautiful."

Hatsumomo turned back to the mirror and sang quietly to herself. She painted her face and neck with a pale yellow cream, but left her eyes bare as well as the area around her lips and nose. Then she used the smaller brushes on these areas. I knew that in an hour or two, men would be looking with astonishment at that face; and I would still be here, cleaning the courtyard and the toilets in the okiya, washing the rice bowls, and sweating.

"I know what you're thinking," said Hatsumomo. "You're thinking you'll never be so beautiful. Well, it's perfectly true."

Then she sent me down to the room in the courtyard to get her a kimono. Outside the room I saw Mr. Bekku. I knew now that collecting young girls from fishing villages was not Mr. Bekku's only job. He was Hatsumomo's dresser and he helped her with the complicated job of dressing in the many elegant kimonos that the okiya owned.

"Oh, it's you," said Hatsumomo, when I returned with a kimono. "I thought I heard a little mouse or something. Tell me, are you the one who re-arranges all my make-up jars?"

"I'm very sorry, ma'am," I said. "I only move them to dust underneath."

"But if you touch them," she said, "they'll start to smell like you. And then the men will say to me, 'Hatsumomo-san, you smell just like a stupid girl from a fishing village.' I'm sure you understand that, don't you? But repeat it, just to be sure. Why don't I want you to touch my make-up?"

It was difficult to make myself say it, but in the end I did.

"Because it will start to smell like me," I said.

"That's very good. And what will the men say?"

"They'll say, 'Hatsumomo-san, you smell just like a stupid girl from a fishing village.'"

"Hmmm... there's something about the way you said it that I don't like."

Hatsumomo smiled and stood very close to me. I thought she was going to whisper in my ear, but she hit me across the face with her open hand.

I must have run out of the room because the next thing I can remember is Mrs. Nitta opening her door while she was still talking on the phone. I went into her room. Mrs. Nitta said, "Sorry," into the mouthpiece of the phone and added, "Hatsumomo is hitting the maids again."

When she was finished on the telephone, she called for Hatsumomo. "Hatsumomo! What have you done to Chiyo?"

Hatsumomo looked innocent. "She moved all my make-up jars, Mother, and she put her fingers in them."

I said nothing. Mrs. Nitta made me say "sorry" to Hatsumomo, and then she made me say it again in a correct Kyoto accent.

When Hatsumomo left, smiling, Mrs. Nitta said, "I don't think you understand your job here in the okiya." She nodded at the accounts. "We all think of only one thing-how we can help Hatsumomo be successful as a geisha. I don't want to hear that you've upset Hatsumomo again. If Pumpkin can stay out of her way, so can you."

"Yes, Mrs. Nitta."

But I couldn't keep out of Hatsumomo's way. She often hit me across the face when we were alone together. And she always criticized the way I looked, especially my eyes.

"I once saw a dead man fished out of the river," she said to me one time, "and his tongue was just the same color as your eyes."

Another time a man came to the okiya at night. He was wearing a traditional workman's jacket.

"You're a pretty one," he said to me in a low voice. "What's your name?"

I thought he must be a workman, though I didn't know what he was doing in the okiya so late. I was frightened of answering him, but I said my name.

Then Hatsumomo appeared. As the man went off toward her room, she stopped and spoke to me. She sounded like an angry cat.

"I haven't tried to make your life really miserable yet," she said. "But if you ever mention that a man came here to see me, that will change."

I wanted to say that she had succeeded in making my life really miserable, even if she hadn't tried. But I didn't say anything; I didn't want her to hit me across the face again.

About a week later, very late at night, I was coming back from taking a drink of water at the well in the courtyard. I heard the outside door open and Hatsumomo came in with another, tall, geisha. Hatsumomo was carrying a package and I could see that she and the tall geisha had been drinking. Hatsumomo drank a lot of beer and amakuchi, a kind of light, sweet wine.

Hatsumomo caught me in the hall. "This is our stupid maid," she said to the tall geisha. "She has a name, I think, but why don't you just call her 'The Little Fish Girl.'"

"Get us some more to drink, Little Fish Girl," said the tall geisha.

"Oh, be quiet, Korin," said Hatsumomo. "You don't need more to drink. Just look at this."

Hatsumomo opened the package. It was a beautiful kimono in different shades of green, with a pattern of red leaves.

Hatsumomo said, "Korin-san, guess whose kimono this is!"

"I wish it belonged to me," said Korin.

"Well, it doesn't," said Hatsumomo. "It belongs to the geisha we hate more than anyone else in the world."

Korin's eyes widened. "Mameha! You have one of Mameha's kimonos! How did you get it?"

"Her maid put the package down for a minute at the Kaburenjo Theater. Mameha is dancing there," said Hatsumomo. "Now, Little Fish Girl, go up to my room and get some ink and one of those brushes I use for writing."

I didn't understand why Hatsumomo wanted these things in the hall in the middle of the night, but of course I did what she said and brought them. Hatsumomo put the end of the brush in the ink. Then she put it into my hand and held my hand over the lovely kimono.

"Practice your writing, little Chiyo," she said.

"I can't do it, Hatsumomo-san," I cried. I heard the noise of a door opening upstairs, but I couldn't see anyone.

"What a shame, Little Fish Girl," said Hatsumomo, "because I definitely remember Mother saying that if you annoy me again you can't start your training as a geisha."

When the brush first touched the kimono, Korin wasn't happy with my first few uncertain brushstrokes. So Hatsumomo instructed me exactly how to ruin the beautiful kimono with ink. When I'd done it, she wrapped the kimono again.

Hatsumomo and Korin opened the door to the street and Hatsumomo told me to follow them. We walked up the alley to a street running along the Shirakawa Stream. Back in those days, the streets and alleys of Gion still had beautiful stone sidewalks. We walked along in the moonlight, past cherry trees whose branches dropped down into the black water. We went over a wooden bridge into a part of Gion I'd never seen before.

Hatsumomo and Korin stopped in front of a wooden door.

"You're going to give this kimono to the maid," Hatsumomo said to me. "Or if Miss Perfect herself answers the door, you may give it to her."

Even with so much fear in my heart, I couldn't help noticing how beautiful Hatsumomo was, next to the tall, long-faced Korin. I took the package with the ruined kimono and knocked at the door.

The maid who opened it wasn't a lot older than me. Behind her I saw a geisha and understood at once why they called her "Miss Perfect." Her face was a perfect oval.

"Asami-san!" said the perfect geisha. "Who's there?"

I put the package into the maid's hands and ran back to the okiya without waiting for Hatsumomo and Korin.

The next morning I saw the maid, Asami, again. She was coming out of Mrs. Nitta's room. Mrs. Nitta immediately sent me to bring Hatsumomo. Hatsumomo had seen Mameha's maid too, and she started speaking before Mrs. Nitta even opened her mouth.

"Oh, Mother, I know just what you're going to say. I felt terrible about the kimono. I tried to stop Chiyo before she put ink on it but it was too late. She must have thought it was mine. I don't know why she's hated me so much from the moment she came here..."

"Everybody knows that you hate Mameha," Mrs. Nitta replied. "You hate anyone more successful than you. Now you listen to me, Hatsumomo. I won't have this sort of behavior in the okiya, even from you. I have great respect for Mameha. And someone has to pay for the kimono. I don't know what happened last night but it's clear whose hand was holding the brush. Pumpkin saw the whole thing from her doorway. Chiyo will pay."

Later that day, in our tiny room upstairs, Pumpkin and I lay on our futons and she explained it all to me.

"I'm sorry," she said. "I tried to help you with Mrs. Nitta. But Hatsumomo's little trick with the kimono is going to cost you more money than you've ever imagined in your life."

"But... how will I pay?"

"When you begin working as a geisha, you'll pay the okiya back for it. You'll also pay back everything else you'll owe-your meals and lessons; your doctor's fees, if you get sick. Why do you think Mrs. Nitta spends all that time in her room with her account books? You owe the okiya even for the money it cost to bring you here."

I thought of my father and Mr. Tanaka. In the weeks I'd spent in Gion, I'd certainly imagined that money had changed hands to bring me here. I saw my little house by the sea in my mind.

"I'm going home," I said to Pumpkin.

"Oh no!" said Pumpkin. "They'll bring you back. And then Mrs. Nitta will see you as a bad investment. She won't put money into someone who might run away again. She won't pay for your geisha lessons."



But I didn't care. At least, I didn't care then; I cared a lot later.



Late that night I lay on my futon, waiting impatiently for darkness. If I could get home again, my mother wouldn't send me back. Maybe she didn't even know what father and Mr. Tanaka had done. I would look after her, she would get better...

I got up quietly and glanced at Pumpkin, sleeping next to me. I dressed in my peasant clothes and shoes and went out to the courtyard.

There was no moon. I went past the room where they keep the kimonos and pulled myself up to the low roof. Slowly, carefully, I felt my way along the roof on my hands and knees in the dark.

The roof of the building next door was a step lower than ours. I knew it was an okiya; all the houses in this block were. Someone would be waiting at the front door for the geisha to return and they would grab me by the arm as I dropped down. So I crossed to the next roof and then the next. And then one of my shoes came off.

I grabbed at it as it slipped down the roof and fell into the courtyard below. As I did this, I lost my balance and slid down the roof. I tried to stop myself sliding by holding onto the roof, but it was smooth and I fell, just as a woman came out into the courtyard. I hit the ground at her feet.

"What's this? It's raining little girls!"

I wanted to jump up and run away, but one whole side of my body hurt. I can't remember getting back to the Nitta okiya but I remember Mrs. Nitta calling the doctor. And I remember the terrible pain.

The next day Mrs. Nitta called me into her room. "I paid seventy-five yen for you," she said. "Then you ruined a kimono and now you've broken your arm so I have medical expenses too. Why should I pay for geisha training? You already owe more than you'll ever repay. Who would invest another yen in a girl who runs away?"

At that moment Hatsumomo came in.

"You're the most expensive maid in all of Gion," she said. "And you'll be a maid for the rest of your life." She smiled. "You'll never be a geisha now."



All that was in the fall. When spring came, the cherry trees were at their most beautiful in Marayama Park and along the Shirakawa Stream. A letter came addressed to me. It was from Mr. Tanaka and it informed me that my mother and my father were no longer on this earth.





CHAPTER THREE



Hatsumomo and Mameha



For two years now, I'd lived the hard and boring life of a maid. My life stretched out before me like a long path going nowhere. Sometimes, out in the street, I watched girls of my age coming back from geisha school, talking to each other. Maybe they were just talking about what they were going to have for lunch, but to me their lives had a purpose. I, on the other hand, was going back to the okiya to wash the stones in the courtyard.



I walked down to Shijo Avenue and turned toward the Kamo River. The Minamiza Theater was showing a kabuki play that afternoon. It was Shibaraku, which is one of our most famous plays, though I knew nothing about kabuki theater at the time.

People streamed up the steps to the theater in the spring sunshine. Among the men in their dark western-style suits or kimonos, there were several geisha. They were so brightly colored that they were like bright fall leaves in the brown waters of a river.

The men and the geisha had a purpose-unlike me. I turned toward the Shirakawa, but even the water in that stream seemed to move with a purpose, running down toward the Kamo River and from there to Osaka Bay and the Inland Sea. Everything had a purpose except me. I threw myself onto the little stone wall at the edge of the stream and cried.

"Oh, the day's too pretty for such unhappiness," said a voice.

The man who had spoken had a broad, calm face. He was probably about forty-five years old, with gray hair combed straight back from his forehead. He was so elegant I couldn't look at him for long. I looked down.

There was a geisha with him. "Oh, she's only a maid!" said the geisha. "Really, Chairman, the kabuki play will be starting soon."

In those days I spent a lot of time in the streets of Gion, taking things to Hatsumomo at teahouses and bringing them back. On my journeys I'd often heard men called by titles like "Department Head" and "Chairman."

"Please, sir," I said to the Chairman. "Don't make yourself late because of me. I'm only a silly girl."

"Look at me a moment," he said.

I didn't dare disobey him. I looked up. He took a handkerchief from his pocket and wiped my tears. As he bent over me, I could smell the talcum powder on his smooth skin.

"Here you are, a beautiful girl with nothing to fear from life, and you're afraid to look at me. Someone's been cruel to you. Or maybe life has been cruel."

"I don't know, sir," I said, though of course I knew very well why I was crying.

"None of us find as much kindness in the world as we should," he told me. "Keep the handkerchief."

I knew then that I would always keep the handkerchief and I would never forget him. I closed my eyes for a moment and when I opened them he was gone.



I ran to Shijo Avenue and all the way to the eastern end of Gion, where the Gion Shrine stood. I climbed the steps to the shrine and began to pray. With my eyes shut tight and the Chairman's handkerchief pressed to my face, I prayed that somehow I could become a geisha.



Pumpkin was still at geisha school. She was a slow learner. Every day she spent hours kneeling in the hall trying to learn to play her shamisen, one of the instruments that geisha play at parties. I walked past her because there was somebody at the door. We had a lot of visitors at the time. Mrs. Nitta's mother had just died, and people from all over Gion were coming to pay their respects. The visitor was the perfect geisha, Mameha.

I wasn't happy to see her because I wanted to forget the kimono incident, but then I remembered that Mameha hadn't actually seen me that night.

"What a beautiful girl," Mameha said to me. "What unusual gray eyes. What's your name?"

"Chiyo, ma'am."

The next day there was a maid among the visitors. After a second or two I recognized Asami, Mameha's maid. To my surprise, Asami didn't go into the okiya to see Mrs. Nitta; she spoke to me at the door.

"Do you ever go out of the okiya, Chiyo?" she asked.

"Yes, often," I said. "Hatsumomo is always forgetting combs, or she wants a shamisen, and I bring these things to her at the teahouse. Or I go out and buy her food and beer."

"Good," said Asami. "Then meet me at the bridge over the Shirakawa Stream at three o'clock tomorrow."

I couldn't understand why she wanted me to do this, but it wasn't difficult to leave the okiya; Mrs. Nitta hardly noticed me. So of course I went to the bridge the next day. Asami led me to Mameha's apartment, the one I'd visited at night with Hatsumomo and Korin two years before.

"Chiyo is here, ma'am," the maid called out.

"All right, thank you, Asami," called Mameha from a back room.

Mameha's apartment wasn't large, but it was extremely elegant, with beautiful tatami mats on the floor that were obviously new and had silk around the edges, not the usual cotton.

At last Mameha came out from the back room, dressed in a lovely white kimono with a water design. I turned and bowed very low on the mats while she walked gracefully to the table. She arranged herself on her knees opposite me, drank delicately from the tea the maid served, and then said:

"Hatsumomo has driven other attractive girls out of Gion."

I felt strangely happy to hear that. I said, "I don't know what I did to make her hate me so much."

"Hatsumomo and I have known each other since I was a girl of six and she was nine," said Mameha. "She's no harder to understand than a cat. A cat that thinks another cat is eating from its dish..."

"But surely Hatsumomo doesn't see me as a rival, ma'am?"

"Not in the teahouses of Gion, maybe. But inside the okiya. You see, Mrs. Nitta never adopted Hatsumomo. If she had, Hatsumomo would be her daughter and Mrs. Nitta would keep all Hatsumomo's earnings. And Hatsumomo is a very successful geisha! Now, why would someone who's as interested in money as Mrs. Nitta not adopt Hatsumomo? There must be a very good reason, don't you think?"

This was all very new to me. I nodded and Mameha went on.

"Mrs. Nitta knows very well what sort of adopted daughter Hatsumomo would be. She would probably drive Mother out, or at least sell the okiya's collection of kimonos and retire. So Mrs. Nitta will never adopt her. But she might adopt you, Chiyo. She might adopt Pumpkin too, but I don't think Hatsumomo is worried about her."

"No. Pumpkin... She finds the geisha training difficult."

"I know. But you're not training at all, Chiyo. You can't become a geisha if you don't train."

I looked down and didn't say anything.

"You're a beautiful girl, Chiyo. And you don t look to me like someone who wants to live her life as a maid," said Mameha.

I said nothing. There was silence in the room for a moment. And then:

"You tried to run away, didn't you?"

With tears in my eyes, I told Mameha how I'd tried to escape along the rooftops.

"I'm sure you're an intelligent girl, Chiyo," said Mameha. "But I don't think that was a very intelligent thing to do. People like you and me, who have water in our personalities, don't choose where we'll flow to."

"Yes," I said. "I'm like a river that's stopped flowing because Hatsumomo is in the way."

"Yes, that's probably true," said Mameha, looking at me calmly.

"But rivers can wash away anything in their path-in time."

From the moment I arrived in Mameha's apartment, I wondered why she'd asked me to come. But now my eyes opened. Mameha and Hatsumomo obviously hated each other- that was clear from the kimono incident. But now Mameha knew there was a young girl at the okiya and saw a way of using me to get revenge on Hatsumomo. Maybe not just revenge; maybe she felt the time was right to be rid of Hatsumomo completely.

"Anyhow," Mameha went on, "nothing will change until Mrs. Nitta lets you start training."

"I don't have much hope of ever persuading her."

"Then I will," said Mameha.

Before I even had time to start feeling happy, Mameha was explaining her plan, beginning with the system of "Older Sister" and "Younger Sister," as it was in those days in Gion.

As I now know, there's a ceremony like a wedding when a geisha takes a young girl as her Younger Sister. Then the geisha introduces the Younger Sister to the owners of all the important teahouses, the ones that have the best parties.

The Older Sister takes her Younger Sister with her to entertain. Of course few men pay high ohana fees to sit and talk to a fifteen-year-old, so the Older Sister and the owner of the teahouse talk to a man until he does.

Eventually, the man who once needed so much persuading may become the Younger Sister's danna, when she's old enough to become a geisha herself.



Hatsumomo had in fact been an Older Sister, and a good one, to one or two younger geisha. But she wouldn't be a good Older Sister to me, I was sure of that. Instead of taking me to the Mizuki Teahouse and introducing me there, she would, I was sure, introduce me to the Kamo River. And then push me in.



A few days after my visit to her apartment, Mameha went to see Mrs. Nitta. To my surprise, Mrs. Nitta sent for me.

"Now, Chiyo, you've been here in the okiya for a year..."

"Two years, ma'am."

"In that time I've taken hardly any notice of you. And then today, along comes a geisha like Mameha to say she wants to be your Older Sister! How on earth am I to understand this?"

Much later, when I knew more about Mameha, I could understand just how surprised Mrs. Nitta was. Mameha, as I later learned, was one of the two or three best-known geisha in Japan. Her Older Sister, Mametsuki, had the Prime Minister of Japan as her danna, before World War I.

But as I saw it then, Mameha was more interested in harming Hatsumomo than helping me. That's how Hatsumomo saw it too, when Mrs. Nitta sent for her. Mameha, of course, had asked for a fee to be my Older Sister but that didn't fool Hatsumomo.

"Really, Mother..." Hatsumomo said to Mrs. Nitta. "Mameha doesn't need Chiyo to make money. Do you think it's an accident that she's chosen a girl who lives in the same okiya as I do? Mameha would probably be Older Sister to your little dog if she thought it would drive me out of Gion."

"Really, Hatsumomo," said Mrs. Nitta. "Why would she want to drive you out of Gion?"

"Because I'm more beautiful. Does she need a better reason? She wants to humble me by telling everyone, 'Oh please meet my new Younger Sister. She lives in the same okiya as Hatsumomo, but they've given her to me for training instead.'"

"I can't imagine Mameha behaving that way," said Mrs. Nitta, quietly. "Hatsumomo, you, of course, will be Pumpkin's Older Sister," she added.



"Of course," said Hatsumomo. She spoke to Mameha for the first time, as Mameha looked calmly back at her. "If you think you can make Chiyo into a more successful geisha than Pumpkin, you can expect a big surprise."



Mameha ignored her. "Will you arrange for Chiyo to start geisha training at school?" she said to Mrs. Nitta.

"Of course," said Mrs. Nitta, bringing her account books. "I had no idea what a fine day this would be."



And it was a fine day for Mrs. Nitta. Two famous geisha were fighting each other to increase the income of her two young girls. She needed to adopt one of the girls, so that the okiya continued when she died. She would choose the one who earned the most; all that girl's earnings would go to the okiya.





CHAPTER FOUR



From Chiyo to Sayuri



Pumpkin had come to the Nitta okiya six months before I arrived. She was born in Sapporo. Her mother died when she was five and her father sent her to Kyoto to live with an uncle. Then the uncle lost his business and he sent Pumpkin to Mrs. Nitta.

Pumpkin was the kind of girl who could get fat quickly, if she had the chance. But they didn't give us much to eat at the okiya, just rice at most meals, with soup once a day and a little dried fish twice a month. Sometimes in the night I'd hear Pumpkin's stomach making noises from hunger.

On our first walk to geisha school together, she suddenly said, "Oh Chiyo-chan! Doesn't it make you hungry?"

We were passing a small Shinto shrine. Inside there were sweet-rice cakes on shelves, but Pumpkin didn't mean them. Outside the doorway, just on the edge of the street, there was a small piece of fish on the sidewalk. You could buy fish like that in the street; somebody had dropped the last piece. Two flies were walking around in circles on it.

"Pumpkin," I said, "if you're hungry, take a sweet-rice cake from that shelf. Don't eat the fish, the flies have got it."

"I'm bigger than they are," said Pumpkin, and she bent down and picked up the fish.

"Pumpkin!" I cried out. "Why don't you eat the sidewalk?"

"OK," she said, and she bent down and licked the sidewalk with her tongue.

When Pumpkin got to her feet again, she clearly couldn't believe what she'd done. But she put the dirty piece of fish in her mouth and chewed it all the way to the block where the school was.

I now know that only some of that block was the school itself. Part of it was actually the Kaburenjo Theater-where the geisha of Gion perform Dances of the Old Capital every spring.

I followed Pumpkin into a long wooden building next to the theater; this was the school. There was a smell of roasted tea leaves which even now makes my stomach turn over. Halfway down a hall was a big, traditional-style Japanese classroom. We put our names down for four classes that morning-shamisen, dance, tea ceremony, and a kind of singing we call nagauta.

Some people call a shamisen a Japanese guitar, but actually it's a lot smaller than a guitar. It has a thin wooden neck, and the entire instrument can be taken apart and put into a box or bag so you can carry it about.

Pumpkin tried to play shamisen before the class started, but even after more than two years, as I knew from listening to her practice, she wasn't very good at it. The room tilled with girls who began practicing shamisen.

Then the teacher came in. She was a tiny old woman with a high voice. Her name was Teacher Mizumi and this is what we called her to her face. But her name, Mizumi, sounds like nezumi - mouse; so behind her back we called her Teacher Mouse.

Pumpkin led me to the front of the room, where we bowed to Teacher Mouse.

"May I introduce Chiyo to you, Teacher," Pumpkin said, "and ask you to teach her because she is a girl of very little talent."

Pumpkin wasn't being rude; this was just the way people spoke back then, when they wanted to be polite. My own mother would have said it the same way. Teacher Mouse looked at me and then said, "You're a smart girl. I can see it just from looking at you. Maybe you can help your sister with her lessons."

Of course she was talking about Pumpkin.

Then we went back to our places, and Teacher Mouse called a girl to the front of the room. After bowing to the teacher, the girl began to play. In a minute or two Teacher Mouse told her to stop and said all sorts of unpleasant things about her playing; then she shut her fan and waved it at the girl to send her to the back of the room.

This continued for more than an hour, then it was Pumpkin's turn. I could see she was nervous and she played badly, even for her. Nobody could tell what tune she was trying to play.

Teacher Mouse banged the table and told her to stop. She hit her fan on the table to give Pumpkin the tune. She put Pumpkin's fingers in the right place on the shamisen-but nothing helped. She sent Pumpkin away to the back of the class and Pumpkin walked slowly, with tears in her eyes.

I was pleased that Pumpkin's other classes weren't as painful to watch as the first one had been. In the dance class, for example, the students practiced the moves together, with the result that no one looked too bad. And Pumpkin wasn't the worst dancer in the group. The singing class, later in the morning, was more difficult for her because she couldn't hear a tune. But there again, the students practiced together, so Pumpkin was able to hide her mistakes by moving her mouth a lot and singing quietly.



After I'd been going to these lessons for some time, I started learning to play a small drum we call a tsutsumi. At parties at teahouses, geisha sing with a shamisen only. But when they perform at the theater, for example in Dances of the Old Capital every spring, six or more shamisen players play together with drums and other instruments. Geisha learn to play all these instruments.



Most of the time, except for Teacher Mouse, the teachers played the tune first and then we all tried to play it back. And then the teacher would call out from the front things like, "The girl at the back, you must keep your finger down, not up in the air."

In all the lessons you were corrected if you spoke in anything except a Kyoto accent, or if you walked badly or sat or knelt badly.

The last lesson every morning was tea ceremony. Geisha are trained to prepare tea for guests in the traditional way and to pour the tea into beautiful cups. Even the guests must hold the cups in a special way, so it's a little like a dance, danced while kneeling.

All these skills needed practice, but of course in the afternoon I still had to clean the okiya, which Pumpkin didn't.

In the beginning Pumpkin and I practiced shamisen together every afternoon. We had great fun together; it was the time of day I looked forward to most.

Then one afternoon, while Pumpkin was teaching me a tune, Hatsumomo came into our room. We didn't even know she was in the okiya.

"Oh, look, it's Mameha's future Little Sister!" she said to me. "I thought you were stupid, Little Fish Girl, but Pumpkin here is even more stupid."

Poor Pumpkin put her shamisen down like a dog putting its tail between its legs. "Have I done something wrong?" she asked.

Hatsumomo pulled Pumpkin's lip so hard she screamed.

"Now I know," said Hatsumomo, still pulling the lip, "that they call you Pumpkin because your head really is full of pumpkin. Now put your shamisen away and go to my room."

Pumpkin started to take her shamisen apart; her lip was bleeding. Hatsumomo turned to me. "You'll have to find yourself another little friend," she said. "After Pumpkin and I have had our talk, she won't speak to you again. Will you, Pumpkin?" Pumpkin nodded; she had no choice, but I could see how sorry she felt. We never practiced shamisen together again.

I told Mameha what had happened the next time I went to see her at her apartment.

"If Pumpkin isn't allowed to speak to you, then you mustn't speak to her either," said Mameha. "You'll only get her into trouble, and she'll have to tell Hatsumomo what you say. You may have trusted the poor girl in the past, but you mustn't any longer."

I felt so sad at this. I blew on my tea and started to drink. "Really, Chiyo, you must stop blowing on your tea in that way," said Mameha. "You look like a peasant! Leave it on the table until it's cool enough to drink."

"I'm sorry," I said. "I didn't know I was doing it."

Mameha asked me to pour her a cup of tea. The pot was empty, but she asked me to do it anyway.

"No!" said Mameha, when I'd poured as elegantly as I could. "You have a lovely arm, and beautiful skin. You should make sure every man who sits near you sees it at least once. Why do you think the sleeves on kimonos are so big? It's so that men can see our arms when we pour tea. Now do it again."

I imagined myself inside a teahouse, sliding open the door of a tatami room. The men turned their heads to look at me, and I saw the Chairman there among them. I smelled his talcum powder. In his smooth fingers he held a teacup. I poured the tea for him, showing him my arm, and felt his eyes on me as I did it.



"That's better," said Mameha.



Some people say that when a young girl has finished her training and she's ready to become a novice geisha, she's like a bird that's ready to leave the nest. I don't agree at all! A bird only has to grow big enough and then fly. I worked for two hard years at shamisen, singing, tea ceremony, and many other skills. I learned to speak in a Kyoto accent and not to behave like a peasant. But finally, one day, the time of the ceremony to make me a novice geisha was at last near.

The first step was to have my hair done the way all novice geisha wore it. Gion had quite a lot of hairdressers in those days; Mameha's worked in a room above a fish restaurant. I had to spend nearly two hours waiting for my turn and I'm sorry to say that the smell of dirty hair in there was terrible. The hairstyles that geisha wore in those days were so complicated and expensive that nobody went to the hairdresser more than once a week.

When my turn came at last, the hairdresser put me over a large sink in a position that made me think he wanted to cut my head off. Then he poured a bucket of warm water over my hair and began to wash it by rubbing soap hard into my head. I was almost in tears from the pain.

"Cry if you have to," said the hairdresser. "Why do you think I put you over a sink?"

He thought that was a joke, but I didn't think it was funny. I was in there for two hours, but my problems with my hair were just beginning. If a novice geisha goes to sleep on a pillow after she has had her hair done, it will spoil it and she will have to go back to the hairdresser again the next day.

So novices sleep on a special pillow called a takamakura. You don't put your hair or your head on this takamakura. You put your neck on it and then go to sleep without moving.



And then there's the kimono. In the beginning I could hardly walk at all in the special kimono that novices wore. I was worried that I might fall over. Young girls wear a very long obi - the wide belt around the kimono. It's longer than the obi that older women wear. The obi is very heavy and so long that it will go from one end of a room to the other. The kimono itself is also very heavy, with long sleeves.



And the colors on a novice's kimono... Years later I met a famous scientist from Kyoto University. He'd been to Africa and seen all the brightly colored monkeys; the most colorful animals in the world. But he said that a novice geisha from Gion in kimono was brighter than any of them.

One sunny October afternoon I was wearing my novice's kimono and had my hair in novice style, when Mameha and I left Mameha's apartment and walked along the Shirakawa. We were watching the leaves of the cherry trees float down to the water. Many people were out walking there and all of them bowed to Mameha. In many cases they also bowed to me. I wondered if the Chairman would think I looked beautiful. I found myself looking out for him in the street, as I often did.

"After two years of training you're getting rather well-known, don't you think?" said Mameha. "People are always asking me about the girl with the lovely gray eyes. You won't be called Chiyo much longer."

"Does Mameha-san mean to say..."

"You're going to make a fine geisha," said Mameha, "but you 11 make an even better one if you think about what you are saying with your eyes."

"I didn't know I was saying anything with them," I said.

"A woman can say more with her eyes than with any other part of her body," said Mameha, "especially in your case. So I think we can say that you are ready to start as a geisha as soon as you can make a man faint with your eyes."

"Mameha-san!" I said. "If I could do that, I'm sure I would know about it by now."



But I wanted to be a geisha so much that I would have tried to make a tree faint if Mameha had told me to. The first man we saw was so old, though, that he looked like a kimono full of bones. He didn't notice me at all, so we turned into Shijo Avenue.



There was a delivery boy carrying some lunch boxes.

"Make him drop his boxes," said Mameha, and she crossed the street and disappeared.

I didn't think it was possible for a girl of sixteen to make a young man drop something just by looking at him; maybe these things happened in movies and books. But I noticed that the young man was already looking at me the way a hungry cat looks at a mouse. And I also noticed that although most of the streets in Gion didn't have a curb, this one did.



I looked up at him, smiled, then looked down again. After a few more steps I did the same thing again. When we were close, I moved into his path and looked him right in the eye. He tried to move out of my way, but his feet hit the curb and he went down. Well, I couldn't help laughing! And I'm happy to say the young man began to laugh too. I helped him pick up his boxes, gave him a little smile before he bowed to me more deeply than any man had ever bowed before, and then he went on his way.



The ceremony took place at the Ichiriki Teahouse, which is certainly the best-known teahouse in all of Japan. You can't see most teahouses from the street, but the Ichiriki, on Shijo Avenue, is as obvious as a palace-which is what it looked like to me.

Two of Mameha s Younger Sisters and Mrs. Nitta came to the ceremony, which lasted about ten minutes. Mameha and I drank sake together. I drank three times and then passed her the cup and she drank three times. We did this with three different cups and then it finished.



From that moment, I was no longer known as Chiyo. I was the novice geisha Sayuri.





CHAPTER FIVE



The Novice Geisha



The 1930s was the time of the Depression, so there were fewer formal parties for me to go to than Mameha would have liked. But we went to small parties and not only at the teahouses. We went to swimming parties on the river, we went to sightseeing parties and kabuki plays.

At some of the parties there were writers and kabuki actors. But I'm sorry to say that the usual geisha party was more boring. The party was often given by a small company for another small company they did business with. The conversation usually wasn't very intelligent. A man might turn to the geisha beside him and say, "The weather certainly is unusually warm, don't you think?" And the geisha would reply with something like, "Oh, yes, very warm."

After the conversation there would usually be a drinking game, or the geisha would try to get all the men singing. Sometimes the geisha played children's games with the businessmen, to keep them happy.

The formal parties were the worst. There was one at Kansai International Hotel. Guests sat shoulder to shoulder in a U-shape around the outside of a big room with tatami mats on the floor. The geisha had to move inside the U-shape, kneeling in front of each guest long enough to pour sake and chat. It wasn't exactly exciting, and it was even less exciting for a novice like me than for Mameha. Whenever Mameha introduced herself to a guest I did the same, bowing very low and saying, "My name is Sayuri; I'm a novice." After that I said nothing and no one said anything to me.



Because I was a novice, I was not supposed to drink sake- novices should seem childlike. But sometimes the men poured a drink and made me drink it. On those occasions Mameha always rescued me, saying, "It's your first day in Gion, Sayuri. You can't get drunk. Just wet your lips." And I would "drink" the sake with my lips closed.



It was just after one of these occasions-I remember the man who wanted me to drink sake had very bad skin-that Hatsumomo and Pumpkin first started following us. We were at the Komoriya Teahouse. I'd just dried my lips from the sake when I saw Hatsumomo smiling at me from the other side of the table. Mameha saw the fear in my face and we left.

That victory for Hatsumomo was quickly followed by many others. We went to a party at Kyoto University. Hatsumomo and Pumpkin appeared ten minutes after we'd arrived.

"Really, I don't think there's anything more difficult than being a novice," Hatsumomo said to the man who was talking to me. "Don't you think so, Sayuri?"

Hatsumomo had two reasons for making this "innocent" remark. First, the man I was talking to forgot all about me and had eyes only for Hatsumomo. Secondly, it was meant to remind us that Pumpkin was no longer a novice. She'd moved to the next stage in becoming a geisha apprentice; she was going to a lot of parties, and she was earning a lot more in ohana fees than me.

I couldn't think of a smart reply to Hatsumomo, but luckily Mameha spoke for me:

"You're certainly right about the novice time being a difficult time of life for you, Hatsumomo-san. Though, of course, you were more awkward than most."

Hatsumomo just smiled. Men don't come to parties to listen to geisha arguing, so, again, we left the party.

Mameha began to take me to parties that she thought Hatsumomo wouldn't know about, but Hatsumomo and Pumpkin always appeared just a few minutes after we arrived.

I knew that Mameha was also worried that Hatsumomo was telling stories, lies, about me. It seems that she'd driven rivals out of Gion before by doing this.

Things were bad but they soon got worse. Mameha and I had just made ourselves look rude by leaving a party shortly after we arrived, to get away from Hatsumomo and Pumpkin, when Mameha pulled me into an empty room and held me by the wrist.

"Did you tell that terrible woman where we would be tonight?" she asked.

"No, Mameha-san. I didn't know myself where we were going until I got to your apartment."

"Yes... Yes, of course. Then how does she...? Is it my maid? But no Asami wouldn't... Come on!"

"Where are we going?"

"Naga Teruomi just arrived in town from Tokyo. Do you know him? He's one of Tokyo's best young musicians. Anyway, he's giving a very small party this evening. We'll be safe there; hardly anybody knows he's even in Kyoto."

The party was at a very small teahouse near the Gion shrine, in east Gion. Ten minutes after we arrived, Hatsumomo and Pumpkin came in. Hatsumomo quickly got everybody's attention and continued her conversation from the last party.

"I was just saying how difficult it is to be a novice," Hatsumomo told the entire party; everybody was listening to her. "I'll tell you a story about a novice... Oh no, I can't-there's one here, at this party."

This, of course, was me.

"I want to hear this story," said one of the men, just as Hatsumomo knew he would.

"Oh very well. But I'll tell it to you only if you all promise that you won't think of this poor girl here as you listen. Picture some other girl in your mind."



Hatsumomo really was a devil. The men might not have pictured the story happening to me earlier, but they certainly would now.



"Let me see, where was I?" Hatsumomo began. "Oh yes. Well, this novice I mentioned... I can't remember her name, but I ought to give her one or you will confuse her with this girl here. Tell me, little novice... what's your name?"

Sayuri, ma'am," I said, my face hot with nervousness. Everybody at the party looked at me and then looked back to Hatsumomo.

"Sayuri! How lovely! Somehow it doesn't suit you. Well, let's call this novice in the story 'Mayuri.' Oh yes, I remember now, Mayuri had funny-colored eyes. Some people thought they were the color of dead worms."

I glanced at Mameha, but I could see there was nothing she could do. Hatsumomo, smiling, continued:

Anyway, this novice became an apprentice and then a geisha very quickly, and one day it was time for her mizuage."

Some of the men at the party, drunk on sake, laughed at this. A geisha's mizuage was taken the first time she spent a night with a man. Some men paid a high fee to be the first with a geisha.

Hatsumomo looked lovelier than ever as she continued her devilish story: "Well, after the mizuage, and this is the first time this has ever happened in Gion, the man who had thought himself so lucky at first, asked for his money back. Do you know why?"

There was a roar of laughter. Of course the drunken men had several suggestions, some ruder than others. Some of them glanced at me as they spoke.

Hatsumomo was laughing too. "No, really, this is serious. It seems that her whole body..." And here Hatsumomo waved her delicate hands to show the line of my body. "Her whole body... was the body of an old woman. Her face was still sixteen or seventeen but underneath, below the neck, well her..."

Hatsumomo was now looking at me directly as she began to describe my body as that of an old woman. Mameha led me from the room, without stopping to say good-bye to Naga Teruomi.

Mameha and I went down the steps of the teahouse. On the bottom step she stopped and waited. At last a young maid came to see us out-the same maid who had shown us up the stairs earlier.

"What a difficult life you must have as a maid!" Mameha said to her. "Probably you want so many things and have so little money to spend. Tell me, what will you do with the money you have just earned?"

"I haven't earned any money, ma'am," she said, but I could see she was lying.

"How much money did Hatsumomo promise you?"

The maid looked at the floor. It wasn't until this moment that I understood what Mameha was thinking. As we learned some time afterward, Hatsumomo had paid at least one maid in every first-class teahouse in Gion to telephone the Nitta okiya as soon as they saw Mameha and me.

Out in the street Mameha said, "I'm trying to think where we can go, but... I can't think of a single place. If that woman has found us here, she can find us anywhere in Gion. I think you should go back to your okiya, Sayuri, and stay there until I can think of a plan."

I ought to have been attending formal parties every night, and ten or fifteen informal parties too, but instead I stayed in the okiya practicing shamisen and dance. My income from party fees was now zero.

In the next few days I went to Mameha's apartment several times, each time hoping that she had thought of a plan, but she hadn't.

"I'm sorry, but you must stay in the okiya for a little longer," she said. "I'm more determined than ever to destroy that evil woman, but until I've thought of a plan it will do you no good at all to follow me around Gion."

Of course I was disappointed to hear it, but Mameha was quite right. Another evening like Naga Teruomi's party would do me more harm than good as a geisha.



Happily, Mameha could still take me with her to entertain outside Gion, where Hatsumomo couldn't pay maids to tell her where we were. I went to Kobe when Mameha opened a new factory. Another time I went with Mameha and the president of the Nippon Telephone Company on a tour of Kyoto in a luxury car. This was the first time I saw how poor some people were in the Depression. We drove along the river, south of the city, and I saw dirty women feeding their babies under the trees and men with no shoes and no hope drinking next to them. I realized that even with Hatsumomo and her cruelty to me, I had a relatively fortunate life during the Depression.



One day Mameha and I were walking across Shijo Avenue Bridge when it was clear to me from her face that something was wrong.

"What is it Mameha-san?" I asked.

"Well, I'll tell you because you'll only hear it from someone else," she said. "Your little friend Pumpkin has won the apprentice's prize this year. She earned more money from ohana than any other apprentice geisha in Gion."

"But... but how?" I said.

Mameha sighed. "In Gion," she began, "a very popular geisha can always make sure her Younger Sister earns more than anyone else if she doesn't mind damaging her own reputation."



Mameha explained that apprentices like Pumpkin were expected to attend about five parties an evening and build relationships. Instead of this, Hatsumomo was taking Pumpkin with her everywhere, to as many as twenty parties a night. The men were paying two lots of ohana charges for a geisha and an apprentice who were spending very little time at the party. In the end both Hatsumomo's and Pumpkin's reputations would suffer. But before that Hatsumomo would have got what she wanted.



"Hatsumomo wants Pumpkin to look good so Mrs. Nitta will adopt her," Mameha finished up. "If Pumpkin is made daughter of the okiya, Hatsumomo is safe. As Pumpkin's Older Sister, Mrs. Nitta won't throw her out. Do you understand what I'm saying, Sayuri? If Pumpkin is adopted, you'll never be free of Hatsumomo, and it's possible that you'll be the one they throw out."



A few days after our conversation, Pumpkin told me that Mrs. Nitta was going to adopt her. It was definite.





CHAPTER SIX



Nobu Toshikazu



"We still have a few weeks before Mrs. Nitta adopts Pumpkin," said Mameha. "We are going to have to take action, and quickly."

I nodded unhappily, not knowing what action we could take; but it seemed that at last Mameha had a plan.

"Do you know about mizuage?" Mameha asked me.

The question reminded me of Hatsumomo's terrible story, so I looked down and said nothing.

Mameha looked at me kindly. "The word mizu means 'water' and age means 'raise up.'"

Mameha then told me what happens when a man spends the night with a woman. She said that some men would pay a lot to be the first one to spend the night with a geisha-the mizuage night. Mameha planned to introduce me to two men who she hoped would bid against each other for my mizuage.



"And then one of them would become my danna?" I asked. I can't say I felt very enthusiastic about that. When I thought about things like that, I always thought about the Chairman. I thought about him all the time anyway.



"Not necessarily," said Mameha. "For some men the mizuage is enough. Other men will be a geisha's danna only after her mizuage."

"So the Baron..." I said, but then I stopped because of the look on Mameha's face.

Baron Matsunaga Tsuneyoshi was Mameha's danna. He paid for Mameha's lovely apartment, where we were having this conversation. Before World War II there were quite a few barons in Japan but Matsunaga Tsuneyoshi was one of the richest of them. He lived in Tokyo, where his family controlled one of Japan's large banks, but he owned a lot of land around Kyoto. He visited Mameha whenever he was in the area and he was the danna of another geisha in Tokyo too.

"No, the Baron didn't take my mizuage," Mameha said, in a way that made it clear that the subject was closed.

"It's strange that Hatsumomo hasn't got a danna," I said, to change the subject.

Mameha smiled, pleased to change the subject and pleased with my growing skill at conversation, which of course is an important skill for a geisha.

"She had a danna at one time," said Mameha. "And of course she has a lot of admirers. But somehow she angered the mistress of the Mizuki, her main teahouse, so the mistress always told men that Hatsumomo wasn't available. The men probably thought that she already had a danna."



Then I remembered the evening years ago when a man visited the okiya late at night and spent the night with Hatsumomo. In the morning, Pumpkin and I heard Hatsumomo crying because the man said he was going back to his wife and didn't want to visit her anymore. Pumpkin said he was a cook at one of the restaurants in Gion. She also told me that if Mrs. Nitta ever found out that Hatsumomo brought men back to the okiya, the situation would be serious, even for a geisha as great as Hatsumomo.



"What are you thinking about Sayuri?" asked Mameha.

"Nothing, Mameha-san," I replied.



Mameha smiled. "You are growing up, Sayuri," she said.



Mameha was still attending a morning engagement when I arrived at her apartment. Her maid showed me into the dressing room to help me with my make-up, and afterward brought in the kimono that Mameha had chosen for me. Mameha had let me wear her kimonos before, but in fact it's unusual for a geisha to lend her kimonos to a Younger Sister. Mameha was showing great kindness to me.

I didn't realize it at the time, but the beautiful kimono that was laid out on the futon for me was well-known in Gion; people who saw it probably thought of Mameha at once. When she allowed me to wear it, she was transferring some of her magic as a geisha to me.

It was the loveliest kimono I'd ever worn-orange silk with a silver waterfall pouring from the knee into a deep blue ocean. The obi was brown with gold in it. When Mr. Itchoda, Mameha's dresser, had tied the obi, I put the Chairman's handkerchief in it. I'd brought it from the okiya. I always put it in the sleeve when I wore a kimono. Then I looked at myself in the mirror and my mouth fell open in amazement at how I looked.

It was amazing to me that Mameha had arranged for me to look so beautiful; but then when she returned to her apartment, she herself changed into a fairly plain kimono. She had the quiet beauty of a pearl, as she always did, but when we walked down the street together, the women who bowed at Mameha were looking at me.



From the Gion Shrine, we rode north in a rickshaw for half an hour, into an area of Kyoto I'd never seen. Along the way Mameha told me we'd be attending a sumo wrestling exhibition as the guests of Iwamura Ken, who had started Iwamura Electric in Osaka. Iwamura's right-hand man, Nobu Toshikazu, President of Iwamura Electric, would also be there. Nobu was quite a fan of sumo. He was also one of the men Mameha hoped would bid for my mizuage.



"I should tell you," Mameha said, "that Nobu looks a little... strange. If you behave well, you will impress him greatly."

Mameha gave me a look: she would be disappointed in me if I didn't. But at least we wouldn't have to worry about Hatsumomo, Mameha told me, maybe to change the subject. Tickets to the exhibition had been sold out weeks before.

At last we climbed out of the rickshaw at the campus of Kyoto University. Mameha led me up a small path, with western-style buildings on both sides of us. The windows were made into tiny glass squares by sticks of painted wood. I hadn't noticed how much Gion seemed like home to me, until I noticed myself feeling out of place at the University.

Smooth-skinned young men stopped to watch as Mameha and I walked past, and then they talked and joked with each other about us. To them we were creatures from another world.

The Exhibition Hall was huge, filled with the noise of the people and with smoke from roasted sweet-rice cakes. In the center was a square where the wrestlers would try to push each other out of the wrestling area to win the contest.



Our places were on tatami mats in the front. Our hosts were there and I saw a man waving his hand to Mameha; I knew at once that he was Nobu. Even from a distance the skin of his face looked like a melted candle. At some time in his life he must have suffered terrible burns. Much later I found out that when he was a young soldier in the Japanese army, he had been injured in the bombing outside Seoul in 1910, at the time when Japan took Korea. He had been in pain ever since.



Next to Nobu, kneeling on the same tatami mat at the front, wearing a man's striped kimono, was the Chairman. The Chairman was looking at me with apparent curiosity. The blood came rushing into my face, making my feet go cold.

"Chairman Iwamura... President Nobu," Mameha said, "this is my new Younger Sister, the apprentice Sayuri."

By now I was an apprentice, like Pumpkin. And even a sixteen-year-old apprentice had heard of Iwamura Ken. But I never imagined for a moment that Iwamura Ken was the man I'd met by the Shirakawa Stream. This was the man I still dreamed about every night; the man whose handkerchief was in my obi at that very moment.

I picked up a small teapot and held the sleeve of my kimono out of the way to pour. To my astonishment and joy, the Chairman's eyes moved to my arm. And then suddenly Mameha stopped talking. For a moment I didn't realize what the problem was. And then I noticed the teapot again. In my happiness that the Chairman was watching me, I hadn't noticed that it was empty. It had been empty even when I'd picked it up.

Mameha laughed. "You can see what a determined girl she is, Chairman," she said. "If there had been a single drop of tea in that pot, Sayuri would have poured it out."

"That certainly is a beautiful kimono your Younger Sister is wearing, Mameha," the Chairman said. "Do I remember seeing it on you, back during your days as an apprentice?"

"It's possible, I suppose," Mameha replied. "But the Chairman has seen me in so many different kimonos over the years, I can't imagine he remembers them all."

A long look passed between the Chairman and Mameha. Then the Chairman said, "Well, I'm no different from any other man. I never forget beauty. But I can never remember which sumo wrestler is which. They all look the same to me."

Mameha leaned across in front of the Chairman and whispered to me, "What the Chairman is really saying is that he doesn't like sumo."

"Now, Mameha," said the Chairman, "if you're trying to get me in trouble with Nobu..."

"Chairman, Nobu-san has known for years how you feel!"

The Chairman smiled and then spoke to me. "Sayuri, is this your first time at sumo?"

I'd been waiting for some excuse to speak with him, but before I'd even taken a breath to answer, several wrestlers came into the Exhibition Hall. Our heads turned and the audience went silent. Nobu had his head turned away from me. I couldn't keep my eyes off the terrible burns on the side of his face and neck and at his ear, half of which was not there at all. Then I saw that the sleeve of his jacket was empty. I hadn't noticed that earlier. Nobu had only one arm.

I turned back to the Chairman. As an apprentice geisha I was free to sit as quietly as an arrangement of flowers if I wanted to, but I was determined not to let this opportunity pass.

"The Chairman asked if this is my first time at sumo," I said. "It is, and I would be grateful if the Chairman could explain it to me.

"If you want to know what's happening," said Nobu, "you'd better talk to me. What's your name, apprentice? I didn't hear what Mameha said."

I turned away from the Chairman with as much difficulty as a hungry child turns away from a plate of food.

"My name is Sayuri, sir," I said.

"Sayuri is a very pretty name-though pretty names and pretty girls don't always go together."



I wondered if his next remark was going to be, "What an ugly Younger Sister you've taken on, Mameha," or something like that, but to my relief he said, "Here's a case where the name and the girl go together. You have especially beautiful eyes. Turn toward me, Sayuri, so I can have another look at them."



I looked at him, as well as I could; then I was rescued by two wrestlers going into the square.

"The first wrestler who is pushed out of that square is the loser," said Nobu. "It might look easy, but how would you like to push a huge man like that out of a square?"

"I suppose I could come up behind him and shout, so he jumped out," I suggested.

This was a mistake. "Be serious," Nobu said.

I know it wasn't a very smart thing to say, but this was my first attempt at joking with a man. Then the Chairman leaned toward me.

"Nobu-san doesn't joke about sumo," he said, quietly.

"I don't joke about the three things that matter most in life," Nobu said. "Sumo, business and war."

The announcer said the winning wrestler's prize would be a great deal of money given by Nobu Toshikazo. Nobu was annoyed and said to the Chairman, "The money isn't from me. It's from Iwamura Electric. I'm sorry, Chairman. The man is a fool."

"There's no mistake, Nobu. After everything you have done for me and the company, it's a small thing to do."

"The Chairman is too kind," said Nobu. "I am very grateful." Later I found a magazine article about the Chairman's company. I discovered that Iwamura Electric nearly went bankrupt in the early 1920s. Nobu found some new investors and saved the company. "I owe Nobu everything," said the Chairman, in the article. He said that Nobu was more like a brother than a business partner.



The announcer welcomed us all and said the wrestlers were yokozuna - that's the highest rank in wrestling. "Just like Mameha's position in Gion," as Nobu explained to me. But if Mameha spent as long getting ready before she did anything as these two elephants did, she would never get another party invitation. The wrestlers spent five minutes throwing salt all over the square and staring at each other, then one pushed the other out and it was finished.



The audience clapped and shouted, but Nobu said, "That wasn't very good."

Two more wrestlers went into the square. I felt that one ear was connected to my mind and the other to my heart. On one side I listened to what Nobu told me-and much of it was interesting. But I was always listening to the Chairman's voice on the other side, as he talked with Mameha. I loved the sound of him.

The last fight was between a star wrestler called Miyagiyama, who was not quite as enormous as the others, and an especially huge man called Saiho.

"Hataki-komi," said Nobu, excitedly. "Miyagiyama will use hataki-komi, you wait and see."

And he did. The larger Saiho rushed at Miyagiyama and the smaller man used hataki-komi, which means he used the energy of the bigger man's attack against him. He moved out of the way when Saiho ran at him and brought his hand down on the man's neck as he ran past, so the rush of Saiho's own attack took him out of the square.

Later, on our way back to Gion, Mameha turned to me excitedly in the rickshaw.

"We're going to use hataki-komi against Hatsumomo," she laughed. "She thinks her rush around the teahouses has earned more money for Pumpkin than I have for you, but we will see her running out of Gion like Saiho ran out of the square. Just keep Nobu-san interested in you. Everything depends on him and one other man. One of them will be your rescuer."



I felt sick inside at the thought of this. I wanted my rescuer to be the Chairman.





CHAPTER SEVEN



Dr. Crab



Two weeks passed, and then one day I received a note to come to Mameha's apartment the following afternoon. By now I was used to beautiful kimonos waiting for me on the futon, so I wasn't surprised at the lovely medium-weight bright red and yellow silk kimono, which showed leaves in a field of golden grass. But I was surprised to find a tear in the back of it, large enough to put two fingers through.

"Asami-san," I said to Mameha's maid, "the most upsetting thing... this kimono is ruined."

Of course I'd told Mameha long ago about the part Hatsumomo made me play when her kimono was ruined with ink, all those years ago. But I certainly didn't want her to think I'd ruined another kimono.

"No, Miss," said Asami. "Mameha-san borrowed it from an okiya down the street. She knows it's torn. The underskirt is torn in the same place."

I'd already put the underskirt on. I reached down and felt my thigh through the hole. Asami was right.

"Mameha-san was very clear that she wanted you to put it on," added Asami.

This made very little sense to me, but I did as Asami said. When at last Mameha rushed in, I asked her about it while she re-did her make-up.

"I told you that my plan is to have two men bidding for your mizuage," said Mameha. "You met Nobu two weeks ago. The other man has been out of town until now, but with the help of this torn kimono, you're going to meet him now."



The mention of Nobu's name made me depressed again because a man will never have a relationship with a geisha if a close friend has been with her for the night. Meeting the Chairman seemed only to have put him further away from me. Mameha's next words made me even more depressed.



"Sayuri, we're just going to put a little cut in your skin. Just a little one, so you can go to the hospital and meet a certain doctor. You know the man I mentioned to you? He's a doctor."

"Can't I just say I have a stomach ache?"

I meant this seriously, but Mameha and Asami couldn't stop laughing.

"Sayuri, we only need to make you bleed just a little, just enough so the Doctor will be willing to look at you," smiled Mameha.

Asami brought a knife from the kitchen and I lay on the futon with a cloth under me and my eyes closed. I bit my lip as soon as I felt the tip of the knife. A little river of blood ran down my leg.

"Good girl," said Mameha. "When you are asked how you cut your leg, this is your answer. You were trying to go to the bathroom in your kimono, and you fell onto something sharp. You don't know what it was because you fainted. Make up all the details you want; just be sure that you sound very childish. And act helpless at the hospital. Let me see you do it."

I lay my head back on the futon and let my eyes roll up. Mameha wasn't at all pleased.

"I didn't say act dead. I said act helpless."

I practiced on the way to the hospital, while Mameha pulled at my kimono to make sure I still looked attractive. At the hospital Mameha gave me one final instruction.

"Remember, Sayuri, we want the Doctor to see you looking as innocent and as helpless as possible. Lie back and look weak." My leg hurt, so I had no difficulty at all with this. A nurse showed us down a long hall to a dusty room with a wooden table. A moment later the door opened and in came Dr. Crab.



Of course, his name wasn't really Dr. Crab, but the reason for the name was obvious enough. He walked bent forward with his elbows out, in a way that made him look just like a crab.



He was obviously a very thorough man. He spent a couple of minutes closing the door, making sure he'd done a good job and that it wouldn't open again. After this he took a small case from his pocket and carefully took out a pair of glasses. He looked at me and gave a little nod and finally he looked at Mameha. He was pleased to see Mameha; his mustache moved a little.

"I'm so sorry to trouble you, Doctor," said Mameha. "But Sayuri has such a bright future and now she has cut her leg. I thought you were the only person to help her."

"Exactly," said Dr. Crab. "Now, could I have a look at the cut?"

"I'm afraid Sayuri gets weak at the sight of blood, Doctor," said Mameha. "It might be best if she turned away and let you look at the cut. It's on the back of her thigh."

"I understand perfectly. Could you please ask her to lie on her stomach on the examining table?"

I couldn't understand why Dr. Crab didn't ask me himself, but to seem obedient I waited until I'd heard the words from Mameha. Then the doctor lifted my kimono as high as he could and put some smelly liquid on the cut with a cloth.

"Sayuri-san," said Dr. Crab, "please tell me how you cut yourself."

I began to tell Dr. Crab the story I'd agreed with Mameha. Finally, Dr. Crab finished with the smelly liquid and told me how to look after the cut for the next few days. Then he put my kimono down again and put away his glasses.

"I'm sorry you have ruined such a fine kimono," he said. "But I'm certainly happy at the chance to have met you. Mameha-san knows I'm always interested in new faces."

"I'm very pleased to have met you, too," I said.



"I may see you one evening quite soon at the Shirae Teahouse," he said. "Let me see. I'll be there..." Then he put his glasses back on again so he could look at a little book he took out of his pocket. "Yes, I'll be there two evenings from now. I do hope to see you."



Mameha assured him we'd be there. In the rickshaw on our way back to Gion she told me I'd done very well.



Later that week I was invited to the Ichiriki Teahouse by Iwamura Electric and then I was invited again without Mameha. Mameha told me not to stay too long, so it would look like I had plenty of other parties to go to. So, after an hour I bowed and said good-bye, as though I were on my way to another party. For some reason, Hatsumomo didn't appear.

Then Iwamura Electric gave a party that was the smallest party I'd attended in Gion, with only two other geisha and four men, including the Chairman and Nobu. This time, Hatsumomo appeared. Her lovely smile grew as soon as Nobu entered the room.

Hatsumomo had missed my first meeting with Nobu at the wrestling, as there had been no maid there to let her know we were there. But she knew all about my "romantic relationship," as she called it, with Nobu, who she called The Fried Man. This was a cruel reference to his face.

So I decided to show her the romantic relationship she'd come to see. I began by touching my neck and my hair all the time, as if I was worried about the way I looked. Then I leaned toward Nobu. I touched the flowers I wore in my hair until they fell into his lap. The flowers fell onto the tatami mat between his crossed legs. I'd planned to get the flowers out from his lap, with girlish laughter, but I didn't have the confidence to do it.



Nobu picked the flowers up himself and turned them in his hand, instead of giving them back. "Get the young maid who greeted me," he said to me. "Tell her I want the package I brought."



I did as Nobu asked and returned to the room. Everyone was waiting and watching me. Nobu was still holding my flowers and didn't take the package from me. "I was going to give it to you later, on your way out," he said to me. "But I think I should give it to you now."

He nodded toward the package in a way that suggested I should open it. I felt very embarrassed, but I opened the package and found a fabulous gold comb to be worn in the hair, in the shape of a half-circle.

"It's an antique I found a few days ago," Nobu said.

The Chairman moved his lips but seemed to have trouble speaking. Eventually he said, "Well, Nobu-san! I have never known you do such a thing before." His face was pale and he looked shocked.

Hatsumomo stood and walked toward me. She knelt near me, took the gold comb and put it in my hair as gently as a mother with a baby.

"Isn't she the loveliest creature," she said to Nobu, nodding at me. Then she gave a deep sigh and soon afterward she left the party.



I was still an apprentice at that time, not a geisha, but for the first time in my life I felt like a geisha. Hatsumomo had not found a way to hurt me at the party; I'd beaten her, using my geisha skills. Of course, Hatsumomo still made trouble for me at parties when she could, and sometimes she won and I lost. But my ohana fees began to increase; I was in demand at parties, and I was becoming well-known.

When an apprentice geisha becomes available for mizuage, she gives boxes of ekubo to the men she knows. These ekubo are sweet-rice cakes and most geisha give them to at least a dozen men, maybe more. But I would give them only to Nobu and the Doctor-if we were lucky.



Dr. Crab hadn't appeared at the Shirae Teahouse, as we'd arranged with him at the hospital. I managed to find Pumpkin alone, when she went out to buy sake for Hatsumomo, and on a bench by the Shirakawa Stream I finally managed to persuade her to tell me what had happened.

Pumpkin, please listen to me," I said. "I wouldn't ask this of you if there was any other way. But I don't want to go back to being a maid and that is what will happen if Hatsumomo has her way. Either that or I will have to leave the okiya. Pumpkin, please."

Suddenly tears ran down Pumpkin's big cheeks, as if they'd been waiting to fall for years.

"Oh, I'm so unhappy, Chiyo-chan," she said. She still called me Chiyo and I still called her Pumpkin, like everybody else did.

Pumpkin, just tell me, how did Hatsumomo stop Dr. Crab coming to the Shirae Teahouse?"

"Oh that," said Pumpkin. "That was easy. The maid at the teahouse told us you and Mameha were on the guest list for a party there. Hatsumomo knew at once. Very few important people go to the Shirae. Crab only goes there because he knows it from his student days, before he made all his money. Hatsumomo thought of him at once. And besides, he is known in Gion as a mizuage specialist.' As soon as Hatsumomo thought of him, she knew what Mameha was planning."

"But why didn't he come?"



"Well, you know Hatsumomo. She can make anyone believe anything. She told the Doctor that you have a boyfriend who spends the night with you in the okiya. Hatsumomo described him, he s a cook in a restaurant around the corner. She said she knows about it but Mrs. Nitta doesn't and Mrs. Nitta would throw you out of the okiya if she ever found out."



I could just imagine how much Hatsumomo must have enjoyed her little story, telling Dr. Crab that her own lover had come to see me. I asked Pumpkin if there was anything more, but she said no.

I thanked her many times for helping me, and told her how sorry I was that she'd had to spend these last few years as a slave to Hatsumomo.



Pumpkin put her head on my shoulder and cried.



Mameha went around all the teahouses in Gion, asking people to tell her if Dr. Crab appeared. After a few nights, word came that he was at a teahouse named the Yashino. I rushed to Mameha's apartment to change into a kimono and then we left for the Yashino with a box of ekubo.

The Yashino was a new teahouse, built in the western style. Instead of tatami mats on the floor, the room we were shown into had armchairs and a sofa. I didn't feel comfortable in the chairs but Mameha told me not to kneel on the floor. She sounded angry. Then she went off to find Dr. Crab.

Dr. Crab didn't look at all happy when Mameha brought him into the room. "I prefer to get back to my party," he said when he saw me. "Please excuse me."

"Sayuri has brought something for you, Doctor," Mameha told him. "Just for a moment, if you please."

After that I think Mameha forgot about using the chairs because when Dr. Crab sat down, we both knelt down in front of him.

"Please accept these ekubo, Doctor," I said, offering him the rice cakes.

"Why are you giving me these?"

"I'm so sorry, Doctor," said Mameha. "I told Sayuri that you would enjoy receiving ekubo from her. I hope I'm not mistaken?"

"You are mistaken. Maybe you don't know this girl as well as you think. I have an excellent opinion of you, Mameha, but I think less of you for introducing this girl to me. I suggest you ask her about the boy who works at a restaurant near her okiya."

I was pleased he'd mentioned this himself; Mameha and I had feared he might not.

"So that's the problem!" Mameha said to him. "You must have talked with Hatsumomo. She has been spreading this story all over Gion. It's completely untrue."

"Why would Hatsumomo do that?"

"Ever since Sayuri was given an important part in Dances of the Old Capital, Hatsumomo has been telling these stories. It seems she wanted the part for her own Younger Sister, a rather large girl called Pumpkin."

The doctor looked at me for the first time. I did my best to look like a star dancer who has had lies told about her.

"I don't like to say this, Doctor," Mameha continued, "but Hatsumomo is a known liar. You can't believe anything she says."

"It's the first I've heard of it."

"Well," said Mameha, "either I'm lying to you now or Hatsumomo was lying to you before. You have to decide which of us you know better, Doctor."

When the Doctor left, walking his crab-like walk, he took the ekubo with him.

One afternoon, a few days later, Mameha came to the okiya and took me into Mrs. Nitta's room to tell me that bidding for my mizuage had begun.





CHAPTER EIGHT



Sayuri Becomes a Geisha



Before my mizuage night, I had to "turn the collar" - change from an apprentice to a geisha. The change is called "turning the collar because an apprentice wears a red collar on the underskirt which shows below her kimono, while a geisha wears a white one. I turned seventeen around the same time, in the summer of 1938.

The day I turned my collar was one of the happiest of Mrs. Nitta's life; or at least she acted more pleased than I've ever seen her. I didn't understand it at the time, but it's perfectly clear to me now what she was thinking. A geisha, unlike an apprentice, is available to a man for more than just pouring his tea, for the right fee. And because of my connection with Mameha and my increasing popularity in Gion, that fee was probably going to be large.

In the end, Dr. Crab offered more than Nobu for my mizuage, 11,500 yen. Until that time, this was the highest amount ever paid for a mizuage in Gion, and possibly in any of the geisha districts of Japan. My mizuage fee was more than a worker earned in a year. Even Mameha's mizuage, although a few years earlier, cost only 8,000 yen.

The mizuage fee was, of course, the reason Mrs. Nitta adopted me. If she hadn't adopted me, some of that money would have fallen into my hands-and I can just imagine how my new Mother would have felt about that!

But, as Mother said to me, "One day the okiya will be yours." We were in her room, sitting at her table, with smoke from her pipe filling the room. I couldn't think of anything to say, but she didn't seem to notice. "You and I will perform a ceremony next week," she said. "After that, you'll be my daughter just as if you'd been born to me."



I was finding it difficult to concentrate on what she was saying; the changes were so great. Mother was telling me that as daughter of the okiya I would sooner or later move into the big room used by Hatsumomo. Hatsumomo would have to share with Pumpkin.



I watched Mother's gray mouth moving and slowly realized that this had always been Mameha's plan but I'd never really believed it would happen.

As this thought came into my mind, the door opened and Hatsumomo herself was there.

"What do you want?" Mother said. "I'm busy."

"Get out," Hatsumomo said to me. "I want to talk with Mother."

"If you want to talk with me," Mother said, "you may ask Sayuri if she'll be kind enough to leave."

"Be kind enough to leave, Sayuri," said Hatsumomo in a funny voice that was supposed to sound like me.

And then, for the first time in my life, I spoke back to her without the fear that she would punish me for it.

"I'll leave if Mother wants me to," I told her.

"Mother, would you be kind enough to make The Little Fish Girl leave the room?" Hatsumomo said.

"Don't talk about Sayuri like that," said Mother. "Now, what do you want?"

The tiny figure of Hatsumomo stood over us, so near that I could smell her perfume.

"Poor Pumpkin's just come running to me, very upset," she began. "I promised her I'd speak with you. She told me something very strange. She said, 'Oh, Hatsumomo! Mother's changed her mind!' But I told her I doubted it was true."

"I don't know what she meant. I certainly haven't changed my mind about anything recently," said Mother.

"So you haven't changed your mind about adopting her?"

"What gave you that idea? I was never going to adopt Pumpkin."

It hurt me to hear Mother say this, not only because it wasn't true, but for Pumpkin's sake. Hatsumomo looked at me with hatred.

"You haven't helped Pumpkin in her apprenticeship as well as I'd hoped," Mother said to Hatsumomo. "She was doing well for a time, but lately..."

"You promised, Mother," said Hatsumomo. It was frightening to hear her. She didn't sound like a person at all, more like an animal-a wounded cat.



"Sayuri will be my daughter in one week," said Mother. "Between now and then you must learn to treat her with respect. When you go downstairs, ask the maid to bring tea for Sayuri and me."



It's strange, and very hard to explain, but the world looked different to me after mizuage. Pumpkin, who hadn't yet had hers, now seemed inexperienced and childlike to me, even though she was older than me. Mother and Hatsumomo and Mameha had all done it, of course, and I was probably much more aware than they were of having had a shared experience.

After mizuage a geisha wears her hair in a new style, with a red silk hairband not a patterned one. For a time, I was so aware of which geisha had red silk hairbands and which had patterned ones that I hardly seemed to notice anything else while walking along the street. I had a new respect for the ones who had been through mizuage, and felt more experienced than the ones who hadn't.



But I didn't just see the world differently after mizuage. My day-to-day life changed as well because of Mother's new view of me. Mother was the sort of person who puts a price on everything. Before my mizuage, I don't think it made any difference to her that Hatsumomo was making trouble for me in Gion when she could. But now I had a high price on me, so she stopped Hatsumomo's troublemaking.



I didn't ask her to do it, and I don't know how she did it. Probably she just said, "Hatsumomo, if your behavior causes trouble for Sayuri and costs this okiya money, you'll be the one to pay it."

Inside the okiya, life was almost pleasurable. As the adopted daughter I ate when I wanted. I chose my kimono first instead of waiting for Pumpkin to choose hers.



Of course, I didn't mind that Hatsumomo hated me because I was treated better, but when Pumpkin passed me in the okiya with a worried look, avoiding my eyes, that caused me real pain.



With my mizuage behind me, Dr. Crab disappeared from my life almost completely. I say "almost" because I still saw him at parties in Gion; but he was a true "mizuage specialist" and so had no more interest in me.

At the next Iwamura Electric party I sat myself next to the Chairman, not Nobu. I didn't mean to, but I ignored Nobu. The Chairman was friendly when I poured his sake, but he didn't really look at me. But I noticed that Nobu was staring at me angrily because I wasn't talking to him. So before the evening was over I spent a bit of time with him and I was careful never to ignore him again after this.

A month or two passed, and then one evening during a party,

I mentioned to Nobu that Mameha had arranged for me to appear at a festival in Hiroshima. I wasn't sure he was listening when I told him, but the next day when I returned to the okiya after my lessons, I found in my room a new travel case he'd sent me as a gift.



I felt terribly ashamed of myself for thinking I could simply forget Nobu after he was no longer needed to bid for my mizuage. I wrote him a note of thanks for the travel case and told him I looked forward to seeing him at the next big party that Iwamura Electric planned in two months' time.



But something strange happened. Just before the party, I received a message saying I wasn't needed after all. I thought maybe they had canceled the party. But I was at the Ichiriki anyway, for another party, and I met a geisha called Katsue, who had just been to the Iwamura party.

"It's a good party," she said. "There must be twenty-five geisha there and nearly fifty men..."



"And... Chairman Iwamura and Nobu-san are both there?" I asked her.



"Not Nobu," said Katsue. "Someone said he went home sick this morning. But the Chairman is there; why do you ask?"

I can't remember what I said to that. But I felt deeply worried. I'd always somehow imagined that the Chairman wanted my company as much as Nobu did. Now I wasn't so sure; maybe Nobu was the only one who cared about me.

The next day, Mother asked to see me in her room.

"This time next month you'll have a danna," she said.

"A danna? But, Mother, I'm only eighteen..."

"Yes. Hatsumomo didn't have a danna until she was twenty. And of course that didn't last... You should be very pleased."

"Oh, I am very pleased," I said untruthfully. "But... having a danna will take a lot of my time and... I'll earn less from party fees."

This didn't deceive Mother. "Leave the business decisions to me," she said. "Only a fool would turn down an offer like the one Nobu Toshikazu has made."

My heart nearly stopped when I heard this. I suppose it was obvious that Nobu would one day propose himself as my danna.

He'd made an offer for my mizuage and since then he'd asked for my company at parties more than any other man.

But reaching the Chairman was the one hope that had helped me through my training. I couldn't give myself to the one man who would put him out of reach forever. I almost ran across Gion to see Mameha.

Mameha knew all about it. "Nobu-san is a good man," she said, 'and very fond of you. I understand you may find Nobu difficult to look at, but..."

"Mameha-san, it isn't that. Nobu-san is a good man, as you say. But, Mameha-san... I don't know how to say it... this is never what I imagined!"

"What do you mean? Nobu-san has always treated you kindly."

"But Mameha-san, I don't want kindness!"



"Don't you? I thought we all wanted kindness. Maybe what you mean is that you want something more than kindness. And that is something you're in no position to ask for."





CHAPTER NINE



General Tottori



Mother gave Mameha a cautious glance because she didn't know why Mameha was there, but then she gave a little bow and thanked her for coming. I didn't know why Mameha had come either. We all sat at the table, looking at each other over Mother's account books.

"I'm sure you must be very pleased," Mameha began, "that Sayuri will soon be taking a datum. And at only eighteen years of age! How young to be taking such a big step."



"Mameha would have done well to take a danna at that age herself," Mother replied. "My advice to you, Mameha-san, is that you do what you are good at, like teaching Sayuri that pretty way of rolling her eyes. You may leave the business decisions to me."



"I would never discuss business with you, Mrs. Nitta. I'm sure you know more about these things... But may I ask? Is it true the most generous offer has come from Nobu Toshikazu?"

"His has been the only offer. I suppose that makes it the most generous."

"The only offer? What a pity... The results are so much better when several men compete. Don't you agree?"

"A hundred yen is a hundred yen," said Mother, "whether it comes from this man or that one."

"I'm sure that's true," said Mameha, softly. "Still, it's disappointing. Because another man has expressed interest in Sayuri, General Tottori Junnosuke..."

At this point I stopped listening to the conversation because I understood for the first time that Mameha was trying to rescue me from Nobu. I certainly hadn't expected that. I had no idea why she had changed her mind since our last conversation. Maybe she had her own reasons that were nothing to do with me. My mind was full of these thoughts, until I felt Mother's hand on my arm.

"Well?" she said.

"Ma'am?"

"I asked if you know the General."

"I've met him a few times, Mother," I said. "He comes to Gion often."

I don't know myself why I said that. The truth is I'd met the General more than a few times. He came to parties in Gion every week. He was a bit short, smaller than I am, in fact. But he was one of those men who everybody looked at all the time. He moved around a lot, always smoking cigarettes, so he seemed to live in a cloud of smoke.



The last time I saw him he was slightly drunk and talked to me for the longest time about all the ranks in the army. Everybody was talking about the army around this time because what we now call World War II, against America and England, had just started.



General Tottori found it very funny when I confused all the army ranks. His own rank was sho-jo, which means "little general"-the lowest of the generals.

But now Mameha was telling Mother that the General had a new job. As Mameha explained it, the new job was like a housewife going to market. If the army needed ink, for example, the General's job was to make sure it got ink at the best possible price.

"With his new job," Mameha said, "the General can now become a danna. And he can be a big help to the okiya."

"No!" said Mother. "The army men never take care of a geisha the way the businessmen or the barons do. They never offer a reliable income."

"Mrs. Nitta, until now in this war, we have been lucky in Gion," Mameha said. "But the shortages will affect us if the fighting continues."

"I'm sure they would affect us," Mother said. "But this war will end in six months."

"And when it does, the army will be even more important. Mrs. Nitta, don't forget that General Tottori can get you anything you want for this okiya, whether the war ends or not."



We all discovered later that Mameha was right. Her argument certainly had a big effect on Mother. She glanced at the teapot and you could almost see her thinking, "Well, I haven't had any trouble getting tea; not yet... though the price has gone up..." And then, without even realizing what she was doing, she put one hand inside her obi and squeezed her silk bag of tobacco.

During September of that year, General Tottori and I drank sake together at a ceremony at the Ichiriki Teahouse. This was the same ceremony I'd first performed with Mameha when she became my Older Sister, and later with Dr. Crab just before my mizuage.



In the weeks afterward, everybody congratulated Mother on finding me such a powerful danna. Everybody except Nobu, who told me briefly and angrily at a party that General Tottori wasn't good enough for me, and then walked away.

On that very first night after the ceremony, I went on the General's instructions to a small hotel with only three rooms in the northwest of Kyoto, called the Suyura Inn. By this time I was used to luxury and that decaying inn was a shock. The walls were wet and the tatami mats were so full of water that they made a noise when I stepped on them. When General Tottori came, he turned on the radio and sat drinking a beer.



As the months passed, my twice-weekly meetings with the General at the Suyura Inn became nothing more than an unpleasant routine. Sometimes I wondered what it might be like with the Chairman; and to tell the truth I was a little afraid that I might not like it, just as with the Doctor and the General.



During the summer of 1939 I was busy with parties, meetings with the General, and dance performances. In the morning when I tried to get up from my futon, I often felt like a bucket filled with nails. I wondered how much I was earning through all my efforts, but I never really expected to find out. So I was very surprised when Mother called me into her room one afternoon and told me I'd earned more in the past six months than both Hatsumomo and Pumpkin combined.

"That means," she said, "that the time has come for you to exchange rooms with them."



If you'd asked me, while I was still a young woman, to tell you the turning point in my relationship with Hatsumomo, I would have said it was my mizuage. But even though it's true that my mizuage made me safe from Hatsumomo, the real turning point occurred the day we exchanged rooms.



To explain this, let me tell you something that Admiral Yamamoto Isoroku once said during an evening at the Ichiriki Teahouse. I can't pretend I knew the Admiral well-he's usually described as the father of the Japanese Navy-but I went to the same parties on a number of occasions. Parties usually grew louder after the Admiral arrived.

At one party the Admiral had, as usual, just won a drinking game. Someone made a joke about him always winning, but the Admiral didn't laugh. He said he never had any doubts about winning.

One of the geisha said, "Oh come on! Everybody loses sometimes, Admiral, even you!"

"I suppose it's true that everyone loses occasionally," said the Admiral. "But never me."

Some people at the party thought this was arrogant, but I didn't. Someone asked him the secret of his success.

"I never try to defeat the man I'm fighting," explained the Admiral. "I try to make him less confident. When you are more confident than your opponent, you will win."

The day I moved into Hatsumomo's room, I became more confident than her.

Tigers walk alone, and everyone knows that a wounded tiger is the most dangerous of the big cats. For that reason Mameha insisted that we follow Hatsumomo around Gion for the few weeks after we exchanged rooms.

So every evening, except when she had an engagement she couldn't miss, Mameha came to our okiya when it got dark and we followed Hatsumomo. On the first night we did this, Hatsumomo pretended to find it amusing. By the end of the fourth night she was looking like a hunted animal. On the fifth night she turned to us and raised her hand to hit Mameha. I screamed, which must have made Hatsumomo stop and think about what she was doing. She stared at us for a moment with eyes burning, before all the fire suddenly went out of her and she walked off.

Plenty of people saw what had happened and a few came over to see if Mameha was all right. She said she was fine and then said, sadly, "Poor Hatsumomo! It must be just as the doctor said. She really does seem to be losing her mind."

There was no doctor, of course, but Mameha's words had the effect she'd hoped for. Soon a rumor spread all over Gion that a doctor had said Hatsumomo was losing her mind.

For years Hatsumomo had been very close to the famous kabuki actor Bando Shojiro VI. Shojiro was an onna-gata, which means that he always played women in the theater. Once, in a magazine interview, he said that Hatsumomo was the most beautiful woman he'd ever seen. He said that on the stage, he tried to be as much like her as possible to make himself seem attractive. Not surprisingly, whenever Shojiro was in town, Hatsumomo visited him.

One afternoon I learned that Shojiro would attend a party later that evening at a teahouse in the geisha district of Pontocho, on the other side of the river from Gion.

Around nine o'clock Mameha and I arrived at Shojiro's party. It was outdoors; the teahouse had built a big wooden platform above the water. It was beautifully lit with paper lamps, and the river was gold with the lights of the restaurants on the opposite bank. Shojiro was in the middle of telling a story in his high voice, as we arrived. Hatsumomo looked frightened at the sight of us.

Mameha knelt right next to Hatsumomo, which I thought was very brave of her. I sat further away. Someone immediately asked Mameha to play the shamisen and dance, which she did.

Shojiro seemed fascinated. After her performance Shojiro, who was a dancer himself, asked her to sit next to him. He turned his back on Hatsumomo.

Nobody knows better than Mameha how to keep a man's attention, and soon Shojiro was charmed into acting some of his best-known performances just for Mameha. Then he started imitating other actors. One of these imitations, of an actor called Bajuri who had performed kabuki in London to great praise, ended with Shojiro holding Mameha and kissing her all over her face. Even Mameha looked surprised. Everyone else on the platform clapped and cheered. Everyone except Hatsumomo.

"You are making a fool of yourself," Hatsumomo told Shojiro.

"Oh, Hatsumomo-san," said Shojiro, "you're jealous!"

"Of course she is!" said Mameha. "Now you must show us how the two of you make friends again. Go on, Shojiro-san. Don't be shy! You must give her the same kisses you gave me!"

Shojiro pulled Hatsumomo to her feet. Hatsumomo didn't want to stand, but Shojiro did it in the end. He bent to kiss her, then pulled his head back, screaming. Hatsumomo had bitten him on the lip.

"Hatsumomo-san, please," said Mameha, as if she was speaking to a child. "As a favor to me... do try to calm down."

I don't know if it was the effect of Mameha's words, or whether maybe Hatsumomo really was losing her mind, but she threw herself at Shojiro, kicking and biting. I do think that in a way she went crazy.

Two men held Hatsumomo from behind as she struggled and kicked and screamed. Unnoticed by anybody, Mameha left and returned a moment later with the mistress of the teahouse. The mistress and Shojiro threw Hatsumomo out of the party.



Hatsumomo didn't return to the okiya at all that night. When she did come back the following day, she smelled like she'd been sick and her hair was all over the place. Mother took her into her room and she was there a long time.



A few days later Hatsumomo left the okiya and never came back. She was wearing a simple cotton dress Mother had given her and her hair was long, down to her shoulders. I'd never seen it like that before. She didn't leave voluntarily; Mother had thrown her out. Hatsumomo wasn't earning what she once had, and Mameha believed that Mother had wanted to get rid of her for years.





CHAPTER TEN



World War II



Having General Tottori as my danna brought little change to my life. But his help to the okiya was extremely useful, at least from Mother's point of view. He paid for many of my expenses, as a danna usually does-including the cost of my lessons, my annual registration fee at the school, my medical expenses and... Oh,

I don't even know what else-my socks probably.

But more importantly, his job with the army was everything Mameha had said it would be. For example, Mother grew sick during March of 1939. We were terribly worried about her and the doctors were no help. But after a telephone call to the General, an important doctor from the military hospital called and gave Mother some medicine that cured her.

The General sent regular deliveries of tea and sugar, as well as some luxuries like make-up and chocolates, which were becoming scarce even in Gion. And of course, Mother had been quite wrong about the war ending within six months. We couldn't believe it at the time but we'd hardly seen the beginning of the dark years.



In Japan we refer to the years of the Depression through World War II as kuraitani-the valley of darkness. In Gion we never suffered as much as others. While most Japanese lived in this dark valley all through the 1930s, for example, in Gion we were still warmed by a bit of sun. And because of General Tottori the sun still reached us, even in World War II.



At least, it reached us until one afternoon just a few weeks before New Year's Day, in December 1942. I'd been busy helping to clean the okiya in preparation for the New Year. I was eating my lunch when a man's voice called out at our entrance. Mother spoke to him and then spoke hurriedly to me. "General Tottori was arrested this morning," she said. "You'd better hide our best things, or they'll be gone tomorrow."

Within a week we were no longer the people who helped all their friends; instead we were the people who most needed help. We'd always got tea for Mameha, but now she began to get it for us.

One day soon the geisha districts would close and we feared we would all end up in factories. We all knew geisha who were already there. Hatsumomo's tall friend, for example, the geisha Korin. She was in a Tokyo factory working double shifts with only a bowl of weak soup with a bit of potato in it for food every day.

Then one morning in the January of 1943, I was standing in line at the rice store in the falling snow, when the shopkeeper next door put out his head and called into the cold:

"It's happened!"

We all looked at each other. For a moment I was too cold to care what he meant. I had thin peasants' clothing on; no one wore a kimono during the day any longer. Finally the geisha in front of me wiped some snow from her face and asked the shopkeeper what he meant.

"The government has announced the closing of the geisha district," he said. "All of you must report to the registry office tomorrow morning for factory work."

I looked at the desperation on the faces of the other geisha around me and I knew we were all thinking the same thing: Which of the men we knew could save us from life in the factories?

There was a rumor that General Tottori had been released and was living in the Suruya Inn, the same place where we'd met during the evenings for so many years. Even though the General had been my datum until the previous year, I certainly wasn't the only geisha who knew him. I had to reach him before anybody else did.

I wasn't dressed for the weather, but I started at once for the northwest of the city. I arrived there an hour or two later, red with the cold and covered with snow. But when I greeted the mistress of the inn, she took a long look at me before bowing in apology and saying she had no idea who I was.

"It's me... Sayuri. I've come to speak with the General."

"Sayuri-san! I never thought I'd see you looking like the wife of a peasant."

She led me inside at once, but before she took me to the General, she dressed me in one of her kimonos. She even found some make-up she had hidden and put it on me, so the General would know who I was.

When I entered his room, General Tottori was sitting at the table listening to the radio. I could see in his face and on his thin body how hard the past years had been for him. He'd been accused of some awful crimes, including theft; some people thought he was lucky not to be in prison. I read an attack on him in a magazine that said that the Japanese Navy's defeat in the South Pacific was all his fault because the supplies were so bad.

"You're looking very well, General," I said, though of course this was a lie. "What a pleasure it is to see you again!"



The General switched off the radio. "You're not the first person to come to me," he said. "There's nothing I can do to help you, Sayuri."



"But I rushed here so quickly! I can't imagine how anyone reached you before I did!"

"Since last week nearly every geisha I know has been to see me, but I don't have friends in power any longer. I don't know why a top geisha like you should come to me anyway. You're liked by so many men with influence."

"There is a difference between being popular and having real friends who will help," I said.

"Yes, you're right. What sort of help have you come to me for anyway?"

"Any help at all, General. We talk about nothing these days in Gion except how miserable life in a factory will be."

"Life will be miserable for the lucky ones. The rest won't even live to see the end of the war."

"I don't understand."

"The bombs will fall soon," the General said. "You can be certain the factories will receive more than their share. If you want to be alive when this war is over, you'd better find someone who can put you in a safe place. I'm sorry I'm not that man, Sayuri. I've already used any influence I had."

The General asked about Mother's health and then we said good-bye. I learned only much later what he meant about using all his influence. The mistress of the Suruya had a young daughter; the General had arranged to send her to a town in northern Japan.

I went to see Mameha. She was nearly as frightened as I was. Her relationship with her danna, the Baron, had ended, and she was now living in a much smaller apartment. She had no advice for me because she was unable to help herself.

"The Baron will do nothing to help me," she said, her face pale with worry. "I've been unable to reach the other men I have in mind. You had better think of someone, Sayuri, and go to him as quickly as you can."

Of course I thought of the Chairman. I would have taken any chance just to speak to him. But I could never have asked him for a favor. He was warm to me when we met by chance, but I wasn't invited to Iwamura parties even when lesser geisha were. I felt hurt by this, but what could I do?

But even if the Chairman had wanted to help me, his problems with the military government had been in the newspapers lately. He had too many of his own troubles.



So I spent the rest of that afternoon going from teahouse to teahouse in the biting cold, asking about men I hadn't seen in weeks or even months. None of the mistresses knew where to find them.



Just before General Tottori became my danna, Nobu used to watch me at the Ichiriki Teahouse, looking more and more puzzled. He'd expected to arrange everything with Mother quickly and to become my danna. I expected that myself, at the time. Even the mistress of the Ichiriki was worried by how angry Nobu was when it didn't happen. I remember him at a party, walking past the mistress without looking at her, his jaw shut hard in anger. And I'll never forget his angry eyes, watching me all through the evening while guests at the party were laughing and enjoying themselves. That was the last time I'd seen him, over four years ago.

That evening, the Ichiriki had a last party before it closed. Some of the geisha looked half dead with fear; others looked calm and lovely, painted with just a little sadness.



I don't know how I looked. My mind was working all the time, thinking which man I'd talk to and how I'd do it. I hardly heard a maid tell me I was wanted in another room. I imagined a group of men had requested my company, but the maid led me to the small rooms at the back of the teahouse. She opened the door of a small tatami room I'd never entered before. And there at the table, alone with a glass of beer, sat Nobu.



There was a beer for me too. Beer was very unusual at this time. When the maid had left, I sat down at the table and we raised our glasses.

"Here's a drink to your danna," said Nobu. "Four years ago I told you he wasn't good enough for you and I was right. Don't you agree?"

"The truth is... he isn't my danna any longer."

"Exactly! And even if he were, he couldn't do a thing for you, could he? Gion's going to close and everyone's terrified for their lives. I received a call at my office today from a certain geisha...

I won't name her. She asked if I could find her a job at Iwamura Electric."

"If you don't mind me asking, what did you tell her?"

"I don't have a job for anyone, hardly even myself. Even the Chairman may have no job soon. He'll be in prison if he doesn't do what the government says. They want us to make airplanes! I mean, honestly! Iwamura make refrigerators and heaters. Sometimes I ask myself what these people are thinking."

"Nobu-san should speak more quietly."

"Who's going to hear me? Your General?"

Speaking of the General," I said, "I did go to see him today, to ask for his help."

"He didn't help you, did he?"

"No, he said he'd already used the influence he had."

"That wouldn't have taken him long. Why didn't he save his influence for you?"

"I haven't seen him in more than a year..."

"You haven't seen me in more than four years. And I have saved my best influence for you. Why didn't you come to me before now?"

"Because I imagined you were angry with me all this time. Just look at you, Nobu-san. Look at the anger in your face. How could I have come to you?"

"How could you not come? I can save you from the factories.

I have something perfect for you. just like a nest for a bird. You're the only one I'll give it to, Sayuri. But I won't give it until you've bowed to the floor and admitted how wrong you were, when you took General Tottori as your danna. Oh yes, I'm angry with you!"

I did what Nobu asked of me. I moved away from the table to make room, and I bowed low to the floor.



"Forgive me for my foolishness," I said.



All the kimono-makers were now making parachutes because they were used to working with silk. Nobu had arranged for me to stay with one of them, a family called Arashino. They lived in the country, outside Kyoto.

The Arashinos were very kind to me during the years I lived in their home. By day I worked with them, sewing parachutes. At night I slept next to their daughter and grandson on a futon on the floor of the workshop where we made the parachutes.

Of course, there wasn't much food. You can't imagine some of the things we learned to eat. We ate food that was usually given to animals. And there was something called nukapan that looked like old dry leather, though the leather would probably have tasted better.

I grew so thin during those years that nobody would have recognized me on the streets of Gion. Some days the Arashinos' little grandson, Juntaro, cried from hunger-and then Mr. Arashino sold one of the kimonos he used to make. This was what we Japanese called the "onion life"-removing layer after layer, and crying all the time.

One night in the spring of 1944 we saw the first bombs dropped on Japan. The bombers passed over us, not only that night but every night. They were flying to the factories in Osaka and Tokyo. I was desperately worried about the Chairman and Nobu, working at the Iwamura factory in Osaka.



The Kamo River flowed below our workshop before it ran to Osaka and then out into the sea. Day after day I threw flowers into the river, hoping that the Chairman, sitting at his desk in Osaka, might look out of the window and see them and think of me. But even if he saw the flowers, I feared he wouldn't think of me. He'd often been kind to me, it was true, but he was a kind man. He'd never shown any sign of recognizing that I was the girl on the bridge or that I cared for him or thought of him.

If I came to the end of my life and had spent every day watching for a man who never came to me, what life would I have had? I'd be like a dancer who had practiced since childhood for a performance she would never give.



I learned during those years that nothing is as unpredictable as who will survive a war and who won't. Mameha survived, working as a nurse in a small hospital, but her maid, Asami, was killed by the terrible bomb that fell on Nagasaki.

Some of the people in the most dangerous places survived. Hatsumomo's dresser, Mr. Bekku, who had taken me from my home in Yoroido, worked for the navy in Osaka and survived somehow. Pumpkin worked in a factory in Osaka that was bombed five times, but she also survived. So did General Tottori, who lived in the Suyura Inn until his death in the mid-1950s. But the geisha Korin and Katsue and the wrestler Miyagiyama were all killed by firebombs in Tokyo.



There was never any doubt that Mother would survive. She spent the war buying and selling, growing richer not poorer. When Mr. Arashino needed to sell a kimono, who do you think bought it from him? And then sold it again for much more than she paid for it.



The war ended for us in August of 1945. Almost everyone who lived in Japan at this time will tell you that it was the blackest moment in a long night of darkness. For a year or more I never once heard the sound of laughter.



But by the spring of 1946 there was again talk of Japan's rebirth. All the stories about American soldiers killing us were shown to be wrong; the Americans were extremely kind. As they drove past on trucks, throwing candy to our children, they had no eyes for me: a thin woman in worn peasant clothes, with hands rough from work on the parachutes. But why had we been taught to hate them?

One cold November afternoon, three years after the end of the war, Mr. Arashino told me there was somebody to see me. By this time Mr. Arashino was making kimonos again and I was helping him.



My visitor was Nobu. He told me that Gion was open again.





CHAPTER ELEVEN



Nobu Again



"I have a task for you to do in Gion," said Nobu. "If it works out as I hope, our company will be trading again in a year or two. Then the time will have come at last for me to become your danna."

My skin went cold when I heard this, but I showed no sign of it. "How mysterious, Nobu-san. A task I could do, which would be helpful to Iwamura Electric?"



"It's an awful task. I won't lie to you. I want you to entertain a man called Sato. He looks and behaves like a pig. He tells me he always sat across the table so he could stare at you. You're the only thing he ever talks about-when he talks at all; most of the time he just sits."



I had to laugh when I heard this. "How awful a task can that be? However much Nobu-san dislikes him, I'm sure I've entertained worse. But how would that help Iwamura?

Nobu sighed. "All through the war, the Chairman resisted the government's orders. When he finally agreed to cooperate, the war was almost over, and nothing we ever made for them-not one thing-was used in the war. But now we have to prove that to the Americans. If they don't believe us, they will take Iwamura, sell it, and use the money to help victims of the war. Sato is the man who will make the decision about Iwamura tor the Americans. He's the new Deputy Minister of Finance."

"Nobu-san," I said, "if it's important to make a good impression on Deputy Minister Sato, maybe you should ask the Chairman to be there when you entertain him."

"The Chairman is a busy man. Sayuri, you do look like a peasant."

And then Nobu got up and left.

The next day I said a tearful good-bye to the Arashinos and, at the age of nearly thirty, I went back to Gion. Mother and I spent four or five days cleaning the okiya, helped by one cook, one maid, and a girl called Etsuko. She was the daughter of the man who owned the farm where Mother had lived during the war. Etsuko was twelve, the same age as I was when I first came to Kyoto.

When the okiya was clean, I went to see Mameha. She was now in a one-room apartment near the Gion Shrine. She was shocked when she first saw me because I was so thin. The truth was, I was just as shocked at the changes in her. Her face was still as lovely as ever, but her neck looked too old for her face. Her mouth showed the problems she'd had with her teeth during the war.

We talked for a long time, and then I asked her if she thought Dances of the Old Capital would start again, the following spring. It hadn't been performed for a number of years.

"With all the American soldiers in Gion these days," she said, "English will get you further than dance. Anyway, the Kaburenjo Theater has been turned into an American cabaret. There's even a new Japanese word for it-kyaberei."

About a week after my return, I was finally ready to make my first appearance as a geisha again. Since I was nearing thirty, I would no longer be expected to wear white make-up except on special occasions. But I did spend half an hour trying western-style make-up to try to hide how thin I'd become.

When Mr. Bekku came to dress me, young Etsuko stood and watched just as I'd once watched Hatsumomo. It was the astonishment in her eyes, more than anything I saw while looking in the mirror, that persuaded me I truly looked like a geisha again.

When at last I set out that evening, snow covered Gion. There were soldiers here and there on the streets and I didn't want to think about what I might find when I reached the Ichiriki. But the only differences were the black shoes of the officers in the entrance, and strangely enough the teahouse was quieter than before the war.

I waited for Nobu and Deputy Minister Sato in an empty room next to the room where I would entertain them. No geisha likes to be seen doing nothing; it makes her look unpopular. This gave me a chance to listen to Nobu struggling to be pleasant as he brought the Minister in.

"Isn't this a nice room, Minister?" said Nobu. I heard a grunt in reply. The Minister really did sound like a pig. Nobu continued, "It's a beautiful night, isn't it? Did I already ask you if you tasted the Ichiriki Teahouse's own special sake?"

When I left my empty room and joined Nobu and the Deputy Minister, Nobu looked very pleased to see me.

I got my first good look at the Minister only after introducing myself and going to kneel at the table. I didn't remember him, even if he had said he'd spent hours staring at me. He kept his chin down on his chest and made no sound except grunts.

When the maid arrived with sake, the Minister poured the drink directly into his lower jaw. He didn't seem to swallow it at all but it disappeared like water down a drain.

Things went on like this for about fifteen minutes; the Minister grunted and poured sake into his jaw. Then he finally said something. He asked me if I was a dancer.

"Yes! Yes, I am," I said. "Would the Minister like me to perform a short dance?"

"No," he said. And that was the end of that.

Very soon we began to play a drinking game. The Minister had never played it before. He kept losing, kept drinking, and Nobu and I just got him out to the snow-covered garden before he threw up. Then the Minister lay very still on his back in the snow.

"Well, Nobu-san," I said. "I didn't know how much fun your guest was going to be."

"I believe we've killed him."

"You must take him out into the street and walk him around a bit to wake him up. The cold will do him good."

"He's lying in the snow. Isn't that cold enough?"

"Nobu-san!" I said.

I went to get a maid to help because Nobu couldn't get the Minister on his feet with only one arm. With the maid's help we got the Minister back inside. The maid cleaned the Minister's jacket and left us alone again.

"We need more geisha next time," I said to Nobu, above the sleeping Minister. "And maybe you should bring the Chairman next time too."

The Minister opened his eyes and managed to pull himself up a little.

"Well, Minister, this certainly has been a wonderful evening!" said Nobu. "Next time we'll have even more fun. Instead of throwing up on just me, you might be able to throw up on the Chairman, and maybe another geisha or two as well!"

"I like this geisha," said the Minister. "I don't want another one."

Whatever the Minister said, it was obvious that we needed more geisha next time. I'd ask Mameha, of course, but I wanted to ask Pumpkin too.

I knew almost nothing about Pumpkin's circumstances, except that she was back in Gion, so I went to speak with Mother. Mother told me that Pumpkin had asked to come back to the okiya when it had reopened but that she, Mother, had refused because Pumpkin would be a poor investment.

"She's living in a poor little okiya over in the Hanami-cho area," Mother said. "But don't go and see her. I think it would be foolish of you to speak with her."

"I have to admit," I said, "I've never felt right about what happened between Pumpkin and me..."

"Nothing happened between you. Pumpkin didn't do well enough and you succeeded. Anyway, she s doing better these days. The Americans can't get enough of her. She says exactly what she thinks. The Americans like that."

That afternoon I crossed Shijo Avenue to the Hanami-cho area of Gion, and found the poor little okiya Mother had told me about. A young maid showed me into a room that didn't smell too good, and came back later to bring me a cup of weak tea. I waited a long time before Pumpkin at last came and slid open the door.

I felt such warmth for her. I got up from the table, wanting to put my arms around her. She took a few steps into the room and then knelt and gave a formal bow, as if I was Mother. I didn't know what to do and just stopped in the middle of the room.

"Really, Pumpkin... it's only me!" I said.

She wouldn't even look at me, but looked down at the mats like a maid waiting for orders. I felt very disappointed and went back to my place at the table.

When we'd last seen each other, during the war, Pumpkin's face was still round and full, but now her heavy cheeks had thinned, leaving her with an elegance that was astonishing to me. I don't mean that Pumpkin had suddenly become a beauty like Hatsumomo, but her face had a certain womanliness that had never been there before.

It was a long time later that I found out what had happened to Pumpkin. After the closing of the factory where she worked, she had to spend more than two years in Osaka, on the streets, selling herself.

"I'm sure the years have been difficult, Pumpkin," I said to her, "but you look quite lovely."

Pumpkin didn't reply to this. She just moved her head to show that she'd heard me. I congratulated her on her popularity and tried asking about her life since the war, but her face showed no expression, so I began to feel sorry I'd come.

Finally, after an awkward silence, she spoke.

"Have you come here just to chat, Sayuri? Because I don't have anything to say that will interest you."

"The truth is," I said, "I saw Nobu Toshikazu recently, and... actually Pumpkin, he'll be bringing Deputy Minister Sato to Gion sometimes. I thought you'd be kind enough to help us entertain him."

"I know you think I'm stupid..."

"Pumpkin!"

"But you probably have some other reason you're not going to tell me about."



"I suppose I do have another reason," I said. "To tell the truth, I'd hoped that after all these years, you and I might be friends, as we once were. We've survived so many things together... including Hatsumomo!"



Pumpkin said nothing.

However, she accepted her invitation to the Ichiriki that Saturday, and she and Mameha and I entertained the Chairman, Nobu, and Sato all through that winter and the following spring, once or twice a week, as long as Sato was deciding the future of Iwamura Electric.

Pumpkin was very good with Sato. The first time she met him she said, in the direct way she now had, "Hey, Minister, I'll bet you don't remember me, but I know a lot about you."

"What do you know?" said Mameha. "Tell us something."

"I know the Minister has a younger sister who's married to the mayor of Tokyo," Pumpkin said. "And I know he broke his hand in a fight once."

The Minister was looking surprised, so these things must have been true. But Pumpkin wasn't finished yet.

"Also Minister, I know a girl you used to know, Nau Itsuko. We worked in a factory outside Osaka together. You know what she told me? She told me you and she did some bad, bad things together."

I was afraid the Minister might be angry, but he looked quite proud of himself. He and Pumpkin were soon friendly, and the Chairman seemed to like her too.

Pumpkin wore a really extraordinary gray kimono to the parties, with bright gold dots on it. These were stars set against a background of water and mountains, in the light of the moon. Neither my kimono nor Mameha's could compare with it.



The Chairman seemed to like the kimono too because he asked Pumpkin to model it for him. She turned around and around slowly for him, so that he could admire her. At the next party Pumpkin wasn't there, she was sick, and the Chairman left early. I spent many unhappy hours wondering if these two events were connected.



My concern about the Chairman's opinion of me made me take a chance. We were playing a game called "Truth and Lies." You have to tell two stories. One of them is the truth, and the other a lie-and then everyone guesses which one was which. Geisha play this game so often that they all have lots of stories ready. But this time I told a story that I'd never told before.

"Once when I was a child," I began, "I was very upset one day, and I went to the banks of the Shirakawa Stream and began to cry..."

As I began this story, I felt almost as though I were reaching across the table to touch the Chairman on the hand. It seemed to me that no one else in the room would consider the story to be unusual, but the Chairman would understand it-or at least I hoped he would. I felt I was having a very private conversation with him alone, and I could feel myself getting warm as I spoke.

When I finished my story, I looked up, expecting to find the Chairman looking at me with understanding, but he didn't even seem to be listening. I felt a fool. Like a girl who walks along the street imagining that every man is looking at her, but the street is empty.

Luckily, the Minister was too drunk to notice anything, and Nobu was busy eating his food. Mameha had just started her story. Pumpkin, though, had been watching me carefully. When I looked at her, she had a smile on her face that I feared, though I didn't completely understand it.

Worse followed. Minister Sato had asked the mistress of the Ichiriki if he could be my danna. Nobu and Mother together didn't have too much difficulty in stopping this. They told the mistress of the Ichiriki to tell Sato that I wasn't available.



Nobu was telling me what happened next. He looked angry, even for him." And do you know what that foolish Minister Sato said? After he found out he wasn't going to be your danna, he sat there for a long time like a pile of dirt and then he finally said, 'Could you arrange for me to be Sayuri's danna just once?' He meant for one night! Really! You wouldn't do that, would you?



"Nobu-san..."

"If you're a woman who would do such a thing, I want you to leave this room right now, and never speak to me again!

He picked his beer glass up and banged it down again on the table so hard that it cracked and beer spilled on the table. He'd cut his hand on the glass too, and there was blood on it. I couldn't understand how the evening had suddenly become so dangerous; but it was perfectly clear to me that I could give only one answer.

"I would never do that," I said.

I thought that would calm him, but for a long terrifying moment the anger stayed in his face. Then he slowly breathed out.

"Next time, speak before I have to cut myself for an answer," he said. "Now listen. Things are possible that weren't possible before. Sato is going to tell the Americans the truth, that Iwamura didn't help the government in the war. The Chairman and I are safe now. I'm going to be your danna.



I left the room as quickly as I could to find a maid to help with Nobu's hand, which was covered with blood from his cut.





CHAPTER TWELVE



Sato



That night as I lay on my futon, I decided to be like a fisherman who hour after hour takes out fish from his net. Whenever I thought of the Chairman, I took the thought from my mind and then again and again until no thoughts were left. It would have been a good system, I'm sure, if I could have made it work. I even tried to think of Nobu instead of the Chairman, but without success.



I did this for weeks, trying to remake myself. I went to parties as usual, but I knelt in silence with my hands in my lap. Mother told me I looked like a ghost. She'd brought in a newspaper while I was eating lunch. There was an article in it about Iwamura. It was a difficult article to read, full of numbers and business terms. But it was clear that Iwamura could make their heaters and refrigerators again, and in the same week the company had got a big loan from Mitsubishi Bank.

"It's no wonder we've heard so much from Nobu Toshikazu these past few days," said Mother. "You must know he wants to be your danna. Well, there's no problem with that now. It's finally happening. We all know how fond you've been of Nobu these past few years."



Mother followed this with some news. The mistress of the Ichiriki had received a telephone call that morning from Iwamura Electric about a trip to the island of Amami, the following weekend. I'd been asked to go, with Mameha and Pumpkin. We were going by airplane. I'd never been on one - I'd never even seen one. I was terrified.



When Friday morning came, we started for Osaka by tram. In addition to Mr. Bekku, who came as far as the airport to help us with our trunks, the little group consisted of Mameha, Pumpkin, and me.

From Osaka Station we traveled to the airport in a little bus not much larger than a car, which burned coal and was very dirty. At last, after an hour or more, we climbed down beside a silver airplane balanced on tiny wheels; and when we went inside the airplane sloped down so much I thought it was broken.

The men were there already, sitting in seats at the back.

With the Chairman, Nobu, and Minister Sato, there was an elderly man who I later learned was President of the Mitsubishi Bank.

We sat toward the front of the airplane and left the men to their dull conversation. Soon I heard a coughing noise and the airplane shook. Then it started to move. The noise of the engines grew worse, and the airplane began to move forward. Finally the noise grew to a terrifying roar, and we began to rise up into the air.

Mameha had put me in a window seat, thinking the view might calm me, but now she saw the ground disappearing below us and she refused to switch seats with me. Someone finally told me the trip was seven hundred kilometers and would take nearly four hours, but only when the ground was far below us. When I heard this, I'm afraid tears came into my eyes, and everyone began to laugh at me.

I pulled the curtains over the windows and tried to calm myself by reading a magazine. Some time later, after Mameha had fallen asleep in the seat beside me, I looked up and saw Nobu standing over me.

"Sayuri, are you well? he said, speaking quietly so he didn't wake Mameha.

"I don't think Nobu-san has ever asked me that before," I said. "He must be in a very cheerful mood."

"The future has never looked better!"

Nobu looked at me and then walked away. For a moment I thought he might see in my eyes that I was as worried about my future with him as he was happy about his future with me. But of course he didn't. Nobu understood me so little. A geisha who expects understanding from her danna is like a mouse expecting sympathy from a snake.



The Chairman was the only man I'd ever entertained as Sayuri the geisha who had also known me as Chiyo. Why couldn't I stop thinking about the Chairman? If you'd asked me that, I would have answered, "Why does water run downhill?"

"Why do fish taste of fish?"



I looked out of the airplane window at the blue water far below. And then a frightening picture came into my mind of me cutting the cord that tied me to Nobu and watching him fall from the airplane into the ocean.

Of course, I don't mean that I was really going to throw Nobu out of the airplane, but I did have a sudden understanding of the one thing I could do to end my relationship with him forever. Nobu himself had told me how to do it, just a moment after cutting his hand that night at the Ichiriki Teahouse only a few weeks earlier. If I could agree to give myself to Minister Sato for one night, he'd said, he would never speak to me again.



As we left the airplane, I must still have looked very worried because Mameha kept telling me that I was safe at last.



We arrived at our inn about an hour before sunset. The others admired the room where we would all be staying. I pretended to admire it too, but I wasn't really interested; I was too worried about what I was going to do. But the room was nice. It was as big as the largest room at the Ichiriki Teahouse, with tatami mats, dark wood and beautiful Japanese furniture.

When the luggage was unpacked, we were all ready for a bath. The men's and women's changing and washing areas were separate, but when we entered the pool of natural water at the inn we were together. In my day it was considered normal for geisha to take a bath with their best customers and sleep in the same room as them.



A geisha would never be alone with a man who wasn't her danna, but in a group like this, with water covering our bodies, well, that was accepted. And we even have a word for sleeping in a group-zakone, "fish sleeping." If you picture in your mind the way fish look in a basket, you'll understand the name.



Nobu had been in the water for a long time, talking to the Chairman, but now he was sitting on a rock with only his legs in the water. He was rubbing the stump of his arm with the other hand and looking into the water.



I'd never seen his body before. His damaged shoulder looked as bad as his face. And now I was thinking about betraying him. He'd think I'd done it for only one reason, and would never understand the truth. I hated the thought of hurting Nobu or destroying his good opinion of me. Could I really do what I'd thought of on the airplane?



After breakfast the following morning, we all took a walk through the streets of the little village. Nobu was as cheerful as I'd ever seen him. found an old wood building with a sloped roof. We walked around to the back, where Nobu climbed stone steps to open a door at the corner. Sunlight fell across a dusty stage built out of wood; at one time this had obviously been the town's theater.

I had a picture in my mind of me lying there on that wooden stage with Minister Sato as the door opened and sunlight fell on us. We'd have no place to hide; Nobu couldn't possibly fail to see us.

As we walked back toward our inn, I walked behind the rest of the group because I wanted to take my handkerchief from my sleeve. It was very hot and the sun was shining full onto our faces. Nobu came walking back to ask if I was all right.

"You haven't looked well all weekend, Sayuri," he said. "Maybe you should have stayed in Kyoto."

"But then I wouldn't have seen this beautiful island."

"I'm sure this is the farthest you've ever been from your home. We're a long way from Kyoto now."

I had the same thought that I'd had on the airplane; that Nobu didn't understand me at all. Kyoto wasn't my home. And at that moment, as I looked at him in the hot sun, I decided to betray Nobu, even though he was looking at me with kindness.

But I had no idea how I'd get Minister Sato to the theater with me, and even less idea how I'd arrange for Nobu to find us there. Maybe Pumpkin would take Nobu for a walk if I asked her to? I didn't think I could ask Mameha. Pumpkin would be much less shocked at what I was planning than Mameha would be. I'd need to tell Pumpkin very clearly to bring Nobu to the old theater.

But first I had to speak to the Minister, who right now was putting fish into his lower jaw. He ate in the same way as he drank beer. It looked awful.

"Minister," I said, "when you have finished your food why don't you and I look around the inn together?"

I didn't wait for him to reply, but walked from the room. I was relieved when he came out a moment later to join me.

"Minister," I said, "why don't we take a walk back down to the village together?"

He looked very confused by this.

"There's something I would like to see again," I added.

The Minister grunted a "yes" and I told him to wait while I went to find Pumpkin. She was in her room, looking through her trunk for something.

"Pumpkin," I said, "I need to ask a favor."

I waited for her to tell me she was happy to help, but she just stood with her eyes on me.

"I hope you won't mind me asking..."

"Ask," she said.

"The Minister and I are going for a walk. I'm going to take him to the old theater, and..."

"Why?"

"So that he and I can be alone."

"You want to be alone? With the Minister? Are you crazy?"

"I'll explain some other time, but this is what I want you to do. I want you to bring Nobu there and... Pumpkin, this will sound very strange. I want you to find us there together."

"What game are you playing, Sayuri?"

"I don't have time to explain it now. But it's terribly important, Pumpkin. Truthfully, my entire future is in your hands. Just make sure that Nobu sees me and the Minister together. I'll repay you in any way you like."

She looked at me for a long moment. "So it's time tor a favor from Pumpkin again, is it?" she said.

As I walked back to the village with the Minister, I remembered the day Mameha had cut me on the leg and taken me to see Dr. Crab. On that afternoon I'd felt in some sort of danger I couldn't fully understand, and I felt much the same way now. But I kept talking in the hot sun as we walked all the way back to the theater.

"Will you come inside with me for a moment, Minister?"

He didn't seem to know how to react to this, but when I climbed the stone steps and went into the theater he walked after me. But then he just stood there, like a man waiting for a bus.

My hands were shaking. I didn't know if I could do what I'd planned to do.

"Minister," I said. "Even if you can't be my danna..."

A look of understanding spread slowly across the Minister s face.

"We'll go over there," he said, pointing to a corner of the theater.

That was no good. Nobu could miss us if we lay in a corner.

"Let's go up on the stage," I said.



I lay down on the stage, and the Minister lay down on top of me. When he touched me, I imagined life with Nobu as my danna and that helped me to let him do what he wanted. With his jaw on top of my face he looked more animal than human. I shut my eyes.



And then the door opened and there was sunlight over us as we lay there. With the Minister on top of me I had to look carefully but I could just recognize two people. One of them was Pumpkin. The other one was the Chairman.





CHAPTER THIRTEEN



The Chairman



Mameha was kneeling above me. I was puzzled to find that I wasn't in the old theater any longer, but looking up from the tatami floor of a dark little room at the inn. I didn't remember leaving the theater, but I must have done it somehow.

Later, as I walked unsteadily back to my room with a terrible feeling of fear, I saw Pumpkin just coming out of her room. She stopped when she saw me; but she didn't apologize as I half-expected. She turned her head slowly and looked at me the way a snake might look at a mouse.

"Pumpkin," I said, "I asked you to bring Nobu, not the Chairman. I don't understand..."

"Yes, it must be difficult for you to understand, Sayuri, when life doesn't work out perfectly!"

"Perfectly? Nothing worse could have happened... did you misunderstand what I was asking you?"

"You really do think I'm stupid!" she said.

I was confused, and just stood there in silence. "I thought you were my friend," I said at last.

"I thought you were my friend too, once. But that was a long time ago."

"You talk as if I'd done something to harm you, Pumpkin, but..."

"No, you'd never do anything like that, would you? Not the perfect Miss Nitta Sayuri! I suppose it doesn't matter that you took my place as daughter of the okiya? Do you remember that, Sayuri? After I'd helped you about the Doctor-whatever his name was. After I'd risked making Hatsumomo mad at me for helping you! After all that, you stole what was mine."

"But Pumpkin," I interrupted, "couldn't you just have refused to help me? Why did you have to bring the Chairman?"

She looked me in the eye. "I know perfectly well how you feel about him," she said. "Whenever you think there's nobody looking, you look at him like you were his dog. You took something from me a long time ago, Sayuri. Well, how does it feel now?"

During the rest of that evening I don't remember anything very clearly; while the others were drinking and laughing, I could only pretend to laugh. I must have been red because from time to time Mameha touched my neck to see if I was feverish.

I sat as far away from the Chairman as I could, so that our eyes wouldn't have to meet; and I did survive the evening without talking to him. But later, as we were all getting ready for bed, I passed the Chairman as he was going into his room. I should have moved out of his way, but I felt too ashamed. I gave a quick bow and hurried past him, not even trying to hide how unhappy I felt.

After everyone else was asleep, I left the inn with my head spinning and walked back to the ocean. It was dark, the wind was screaming, and the waves were crashing angrily. It was as though the wind and the water had taken on the spirit of my old girlhood enemy, Hatsumomo.



The screaming of the wind and the crashing of the waves seemed to laugh at me. Could it really be that the stream of my life had turned away from the Chairman forever? I took his handkerchief from my sleeve. I'd taken it to bed with me that evening as usual and then put it in my sleeve when I went out. I dried my face with it and then held it up into the wind.

I thought of letting it go and letting the wind take it, but then I thought of the letter Mr. Tanaka had sent me so many years earlier, telling me that my parents were dead. We must always keep something to remember those who have left us. The letter was all that remained of my childhood. The Chairman's handkerchief would be what remained of the rest of my life.



On Wednesday morning, only three days after our return from Amami, I got a message that someone from Iwamura Electric had telephoned the Ichiriki Teahouse to request my presence that evening. This could only mean that everything was still all right after the events on Amami, and Nobu was ready to become my danna.

I dressed late in the afternoon in a yellow silk kimono with a green underskirt and a dark blue and gold obi. I looked at myself in the mirror and saw a defeated woman. My face looked thin, even though as usual I'd put on western-style make-up; even my hair didn't look right. I couldn't think of any way to improve my appearance except to ask Mr. Bekku to re-tie my obi a little higher, to take away some of my sad look.

At the Ichiriki, a maid took me upstairs to the same room where Nobu had met with me on the night Gion was closing. This must mean that Nobu wanted us to meet in the same room to celebrate becoming my danna-though it wouldn't be a celebration for me. But it would be a fine night for Nobu and I would try not to spoil it.

I knelt at one end of the table, careful to position myself so that Nobu could pour sake using his one arm. Could it really be that only five and a half years had passed since our last evening together in this room? So many people had come and gone; so many people I'd once known were now dead.

Was this the life I'd come back to Gion to lead? It was just as Mameha had once told me: we don't become geisha because we want our lives to be happy; we become geisha because we have no choice. If my mother had lived, I might be a wife and mother in Yoroido, by the sea, thinking of Kyoto as a faraway place where the fish were sent.

After ten or fifteen minutes waiting for Nobu, I began to wonder if he was really coming. I knew I shouldn't do it but I lay my head down on the table to rest. I'd slept badly these last few nights.

I didn't fall asleep, but I lost myself for a time in my sadness. And then I had a dream. I dreamt that I felt the Chairman's hand touching my shoulder. I knew it was the Chairman's hand because when I opened my eyes he was there.

For a moment I wondered if I was really awake; but it wasn't a dream. The Chairman was sitting exactly where I'd expected Nobu to sit.

"Nobu-san is... quite all right, is he?" I said.

"Oh yes," said the Chairman. "Quite all right. But he won't be coming this evening."

I was relieved to hear this; but at the same time I was ashamed. I remembered how the Chairman had seen me on Amami, with Minister Sato on top of me with his pants down.

"May I please say, Chairman," I began as steadily as I could, "that my behavior on Amami..."

"I know what you're thinking, Sayuri. But I haven't come here to ask for your apology. Sit quietly a moment. I want to tell you about something that happened a long time ago."

"Chairman, I feel so confused," I managed to say. "Please forgive me, but..."

"Just listen," said the Chairman. "One day, eighteen years ago, I was with a geisha and some friends, taking a walk by the Shirakawa Stream on our way to the theater."

I took the Chairman's handkerchief from my obi and silently put it on the table.

"Where did you get this?"

"Chairman," I said, "all these years I've wondered if you knew I was the little girl you'd spoken to. You gave me your handkerchief on the way to see the play Shibaraku."

"Do you mean to say... even when you were an apprentice, you knew that I was the man who'd spoken to you?"

"I recognized the Chairman the moment I saw him again at the sumo exhibition. But I'm amazed the Chairman remembered we."

"Well, maybe you should look at yourself in the mirror sometimes, Sayuri. Your eyes... I can't explain it. I spend so much of my time talking to men who are never quite telling me the truth; and here was a girl who let me look into her eyes and see straight into her."

And then the Chairman interrupted himself.

"Didn't you ever wonder why Mameha became your Older Sister?" he asked me.

"Mameha? What does Mameha have to do with all this?"

"Sayuri, I am the one who asked Mameha to look after you. I told her about a beautiful young girl I'd met, with amazing gray eyes. I asked her to help you if she ever met you in Gion. And she did meet you. It was two years later, but Mameha remembered. You would certainly never have become a geisha without her help."

It's almost impossible to describe the effect the Chairman's words had on me. I'd always thought that Mameha's reason for helping me was personal-to get rid of Hatsumomo because she hated her. So Mameha was suddenly a different woman in my eyes, and I was a different woman too.

"Chairman, forgive me, but I wish that at some time years ago you could have told me about... all of this. I can t say how much it would have meant to me."

"There's a reason why I never could, Sayuri, and why I had to tell Mameha not to say anything, either. The reason is Nobu. There's something I want to discuss with you, he continued. "It's something Pumpkin said after she took me down to the theater on Amami. I was extremely angry with her, and I demanded to know why she'd done it. For a long time she wouldn't say anything. Then she told me something that made no sense at first. She said you'd asked her to bring Nobu.



"Chairman, please," I began unsteadily. "I made such a terrible mistake..."



"All right, Sayuri," he said. "Now you must understand my relationship with Nobu. Then it will be clear why I've treated you as I have over the years and it will also be clear why I've come here tonight."

And then the Chairman told me all the things I already knew from magazines; how Nobu saved Iwamura Electric in the 1920s, and how Nobu was like a brother to him.

"One day when I'd known you only a short time, he said, "Nobu brought you a present of a comb, and gave it to you in front of everyone at the party. That was when I realized how strong his feelings for you were. Well, I knew in a moment that I couldn't take away from him the thing he so clearly wanted.

"I like Nobu very much," I said, "but what I did on Amami... What I did on Amami, I did because of my feelings for you, Chairman. Every step I have taken in my life since I was a child in Gion, I have taken in the hope of bringing myself closer to you."

"Look at me, Sayuri."

I wanted to do as the Chairman asked, but I couldn't.



"When I saw you there with the Minister, you had a look in your eyes just like the one I saw so many years ago at the Shirakawa Stream. You seemed so desperate, as if you might drown if someone didn't save you. After Pumpkin told me you had intended Nobu to see you with the Minister, I decided to tell him what I'd seen. And when he reacted so angrily... well, if Nobu couldn't forgive you for what you'd done, it was clear to me that he was never truly the man for you. Nobu has given you up, Sayuri. So I've taken nothing away from him."



I was still struggling to understand what was happening to me and what I ought to do or say when the Chairman pulled me close to him and kissed me.



It may surprise you to hear that this was the first time in my life that anyone had really kissed me. General Tottori had sometimes pressed his lips against mine when he was my danna, but there was so little love in it that I wondered if he just needed somewhere to rest his face.





CHAPTER FOURTEEN



New York



Now, nearly forty years later, I sit here in New York and remember that evening with the Chairman as the moment when I finally stopped fighting against the stream of my life. It was also the end of my career as a geisha.

The reason is that the Chairman wanted to keep me away from Nobu, who now hated me. So he paid Mother a very large sum of money each month to let me stop work as a geisha.

The Chairman certainly wasn't going to marry me; he was already married. I still lived in the okiya, but I spent most of my time in a lovely house that the Chairman bought in the northeast of Kyoto. It was supposed to be for guests of Iwamura Electric, but the Chairman and I spent three or four evenings a week together there.

During the day I no longer went to geisha school or visited the teahouses, but I saw Mameha very often. We had tea together several times a week. After all she'd done for me since I was a child, and the special role she'd played in my relationship with the Chairman, I felt a debt to her that I could never repay.

I expected that this would be my life, entertaining the Chairman in the evening and occupying myself during the day in any way I could. But in the fall of 1952, I accompanied the Chairman on his second trip to the United States. It changed my life.

The Chairman said that on his previous visit to America he'd understood real wealth for the first time. Most Japanese at this time had electricity only during certain hours, for example, but the lights in American cities were on all the time. And even in small American towns, the Chairman told me, the movie theaters were as grand as our National Theater.

But he was most amazed by the fact that every family in the United States owned a refrigerator. This could be bought with an average worker's monthly salary. In Japan, a worker needed fifteen months' salary to buy such a thing; few families could afford it.

Then, when I looked out of the window of my room at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel and saw buildings like mountains around me, and smooth, clean streets below, I had the feeling I was seeing a world in which anything was possible.

Over the next three years I traveled with the Chairman twice more to the United States. When he was out on business during the day, my maid and I went to museums and restaurants. We even found one of the few Japanese restaurants in New York. I'd known the manager well in Gion before the war.



During lunch one afternoon I found myself in a private room in the back of the restaurant, entertaining a number of men I hadn't seen in years - the Vice President of the Nippon Telephone Company, the new Japanese Ambassador, and a Professor from Kyoto University. It was almost like being back in Gion again.



In the summer of 1956 the Chairman and I were sitting outdoors after dinner at Iwamura Electric's house in northeast Kyoto. The Chairman had just told me that he had a plan to open a branch of his company in New York. There was something I'd wanted to discuss with him for some time and this news gave me my chance.

"I keep thinking of the Ichiriki Teahouse," I began, "and truthfully, I'm beginning to realize how much I miss entertaining."

The Chairman just took a bite of his ice-cream and then put his spoon down on the dish again.

"Of course, I can never go back to work in Gion," I continued. "I know that perfectly well. But I wonder, Danna-sama... isn't there a place for a small teahouse in New York City?"

"I don't know what you're talking about," he said. "There's no reason why you should want to leave Japan."

"It's true that leaving Japan would be a big change. But now that Danna-sama will be spending more and more of his time in the United States..."

In August of that same year, I moved to New York City to start my own very small teahouse for Japanese businessmen and politicians traveling through the United States. Of course, Mother tried to make sure that my new business in New York would be controlled by the Nitta okiya, but the Chairman refused to consider any such arrangement.

Mother had power over me as long as I remained in Gion, but I broke my ties with her by leaving. The Chairman sent in two of his accountants to make sure that Mother gave me every last yen that I'd earned.

New York is an exciting city. I felt at least as much at home as I ever did in Gion. In fact, as I look back, the many long weeks I've spent here with the Chairman have made my life in the United States even fuller and happier than it was in Japan.

My little teahouse, on the second floor of an old club off Fifth Avenue, was successful from the beginning. A number of geisha have come from Gion to work with me there, and even Mameha sometimes visits.

I never go back to Gion; I think I'd be disturbed by all the changes. After Mother's death, a few years ago, the Nitta okiya was pulled down and replaced by a bookshop with two apartments above it.

On his last visit to New York City, the Chairman and I took a walk through Central Park. He stood with his two weak, old hands on his walking stick, and his eyes closed, and he breathed in deeply the memories of the past.

"Sometimes," he sighed, "I think the things I remember are more real than the things I see."

We went back to my apartment and drank from each other until I was full of him and he was full of me. The Chairman died only a few months later.

Everything that ever happened to me was like a stream tailing over rocks, down, down, until it reached the ocean the Chairman. I've lived my life again just telling it to you.

It's true that when I cross Park Avenue, I notice how strange everything is. The yellow taxis that go rushing past, making that noise with their loud horns; the women in their business suits, who looked so surprised to see a little old Japanese woman standing on the street corner in a kimono. But, really, would Yoroido seem less strange it I went back there again?

Whatever our struggles, and whether we sink or swim, our world is no more permanent than a wave rising on the ocean.





- THE END -

Hope you have enjoyed the reading!

Come back to http://english-e-reader.net/ to find more fascinating and exciting stories!





</doc>
<doc id="file22688794" filename="to kill a mock_.txt" parent_folder="upload">
To Kill a Mockingbird
by Harper Lee

Retold by Jen Sanders, Beth Sampson, 
& teachers of the Newton Public Schools


Setting:  Maycomb, Alabama, 1930’s
Narrator:  Jean Louise “Scout” Finch

Chapter 1
	When my brother Jem was almost 13 he broke his arm, badly.  Even though it healed, we always talked about what really caused the accident.  I said the Ewells, but he said Dill and Boo Radley started it.  But then he said if our ancestors, the Finches had never moved to Alabama, then none of this would have happened, and the rest is history.
	We’re southerners.  We think it’s a big deal who your family is, where you’ve come from, and what you’re known for.  Our ancestor, Simon Finch, was a stingy and religious man.  He saved up all his money to buy up Finch’s Landing, and for generations that’s where our family has lived.  My Aunt Alexandra still lives here now with her quiet husband.  My father Atticus Finch, went to Montgomery, Alabama to study law, and his brother Jack went to Boston to study to be a doctor.  My father moved back to Maycomb once he finished law school.

	Maycomb was a tired, old town back in those days.  People moved slowly, ambling across the town square.  Days seemed long, especially on hot summer days.  People didn’t hurry, because there was nowhere to go, nothing to buy, no money to buy it with, and nothing to see.
	We lived on the main street, Atticus, Jem, and I.  Our father played with us, read to us, and treated us fine.  We had a cook too, Calpurnia.  She was strict with me.  She always asked me why I didn’t behave as well as Jem.  But he was older anyhow.  She always won our battles; my father always took her side.  Our mother died of a heart attack when I was two so I didn’t remember her.  Jem seemed to miss her though.
	One day during the summer when I was six and Jem was nine, we were playing in our neighborhood as usual.  We heard something in Miss Rachel’s garden.  We found a boy sitting looking at us.  
	He said, “I’m Charles Baker Harris.  I can read.”
	“So what?”  I said.
	Jem wanted to get a better look at him so he said, “Why don’t you come over, Charles Baker Harris.”
	“Folks call me Dill, “ he said, struggling to fit under the fence.  Dill told us he was from Mississippi, but was spending the summer with his aunt Rachel.  He had seen a bunch of movies, so he described them to us, and we spent the next days acting them out.  He was very creative, and always had good ideas.  We eventually got tired of recreating Dracula and other stories.  That’s when Dill’s fascination with the Radley house began.
	The Radley house had sagging shingles, and a drooping porch.  The grass was too high and the paint had turned gray and dingy.  Even in the long, hot summer, the doors were shut up tight.  There was a rumor that it was haunted.  People said “Boo” Radley went out at night and peeped in people’s windows.  That he breathed on flowers and they froze instantly.  They said he committed little crimes in the night but not one ever saw him.
	The history of the story is that Arthur, “Boo”, got into a bad crowd in high school.  They swore, fought, and got into real trouble when they locked a court officer in the outhouse (bathroom).  Boo’s father was so strict that the judge let him take Boo home, and no one had seen him since.  Years later, the story goes, Boo was making a scrapbook out of articles from the Maycomb Tribune when he stabbed his father with a pair of scissors, and kept right on cutting.
	Mr. Radley was not a nice man.  He went to town each day but never spoke to us even if we said “Good Morning, Sir.”
	When he died, Calpurnia said, “There goes the meanest man God ever blew breath into.”  The neighborhood thought maybe Boo would come out, but his older brother Nathan moved in and he was just as mean.  Atticus didn’t like us to talk about the Radleys much, but the more we told Dill about the Radleys, the more he wanted to know.  He would stand there hugging the light pole.
	“Wonder what he does in there,” he would murmur.  “Wonder what he looks like?”
	Jem said Boo was six and a half feet tall, ate squirrels and cats, his teeth were yellow, and he drooled most of the time.
	“Let’s try to make him come out,” said Dill.  Dill bet Jem to go up and knock on the door.  Jem thought about it for three days.
	“You’re scared,” Dill said.
	“Ain’t scared, just trying to be respectful,” Jem said.
	Three days later, after Dill had taunted him and called him scared repeatedly, Jem finally gave in.  He walked slowly to the Radley yard, threw open the gate, sped to the house, slapped it with his hand, and sprinted back to us.  When we were safe on our porch, we looked back at the old, droopy house.  We thought we saw a slight movement inside.
 

Chapter 2
I was really looking forward to starting school.  I was going into the first grade.  Finally!  Atticus made Jem take me to school on the first day.  I think Atticus even gave him some money as a bribe to let me tag along because I heard a jingle in Jem’s pockets on the way.  Jem told me that during school I wasn’t supposed to bother him.  We couldn’t play together because it would embarrass him since he was in fifth grade.
	My teacher’s name was Miss Caroline Fisher.  She was twenty-one years old and very pretty.  She had bright auburn hair, pink cheeks, and wore crimson fingernail polish.  Miss Caroline was from Winston County, which is in northern Alabama.  She read us a story about cats on the first day.  The cats had long conversations with one another, they wore cunning little clothes and lived in a warm house beneath a kitchen stove.  By the time Mrs. Cat called the drugstore for an order of chocolate malted mice the class was wriggling in their seats.  They thought this story was too immature for them.  My classmates and I were very mature in a way because, even though they are young, they have had to chop cotton and feed hogs since they were very little.
	Miss Caroline Fisher found out that I could already read, and this upset her.  She wanted to teach me to read herself, I guess, and I think it disappointed her that I already knew how.  So she got made at me!!  How ridiculous!  She told me that my father, Atticus, should not teach me anymore because he would do it all wrong.  But I told her that he didn’t teach me!  So Miss Caroline said, “Let’s not let our imaginations run away with us, dear.  Now you tell your father not to teach you any more.  It’s best to begin reading with a fresh mind.  You tell him I’ll take over from here and try to undo the damage.  Your father does not know how to teach.”
	I guess I picked up reading from sitting in my father’s lap each night while he read the newspaper out loud and followed along underneath the words with his finger.  Miss Caroline also got made at me for knowing how to write!! Calpurnia was to blame for that!!  On rainy days she would have me sit and copy out a chapter of the Bible.
	
When lunchtime rolled around on ten first day of school, Miss Caroline noticed that Walter Cunningham had no lunch.  She tried to loan him a quarter to buy lunch, but he was very embarrassed and kept saying no.  The class expected ME to explain the situation to Miss Caroline, so I did.  When I stood up, she asked, “What is it, Jean Louise?”
I replied, “Miss Caroline, he’s a Cunningham.”  
But she didn’t understand what I meant.  What I was trying to tell her was that the Cunninghams were very poor farmers, but they never took charity.  They never took anything that they couldn’t pay back.  And since Walter couldn’t pay Miss Caroline back, he wouldn’t take her money.
I remember one time when Atticus did some legal work for Walter Cunningham’s father, whose name is also Walter.  Mr. Cunningham paid my father back not with money, but with a load of wood and a sack of hickory nuts.
Miss Caroline didn’t understand me though.  She thought I was being rude and making jokes.  So she told me to hold out my hand.  I thought she was going to spit in my hand because in Maycomb, kids spit in each other’s hands to seal a promise.  But instead she patted my hand twelve times with a ruler.  All of the kids started laughing when they realized that Miss Caroline thought she was “whipping” me.  Most kids were used to being REALLY whipped if they got in trouble, not patted lightly with a ruler!  She sent me to the corner until the bell rang for lunch.
As I left I saw Miss Caroline bury her head in her arms because she was having a hard first day.  She doesn’t understand the way we do things here in Maycomb, and she doesn’t understand how poor some of the kids are.  I would have felt sorry for her if she had not been so mean to me!!  She was a pretty little thing.

Chapter 3
	I was angry at Walter Cunningham for getting me into trouble with Miss Caroline.  I wrestled with him and pushed his face into the ground when Jem came over.  Jem tells me to stop and invites Walter over to our house for lunch.  On the way to the Finch’s house we ran past the Radley house.  Walter informs Jem that he almost died because he ate the pecans from their tree.  The children think that Boo poisons the nuts.  During lunch Walter talks with Atticus.  He says he has trouble passing the first grade because he has to leave school every spring to help on the farm.  While eating lunch, Walter asks for molasses and pours it all over his food.  I asked him what crazy thing was he doing and Calpurnia told me to come into the kitchen.  I told her that he probably would have poured the molasses into his milk if I didn’t stop him.  Calpurnia says that no matter whether you think you are better than another, you don’t make fun of them while they are a guest in your house.  I thought to myself that I would get her and then she’d be sorry.  Jem and Walter went back to school ahead of me and I told Atticus he should “pack her off”.  Atticus says that he will do no such thing and that Calpurnia is valuable to the family and that I should listen to what Cal says.
	I returned to school for the afternoon session.  During this part of the day. I watched while Miss Caroline tried to control a student named Burris Ewell.  Miss Caroline’s attention goes to Burris because she notices something crawling in his hair.  It’s lice!  Burris is unaffected by the commotion he had caused.  Miss Caroline naively tells Burris to go home and wash his hair. Burris informs her that he only comes the first day anyway just to please the truancy lady.  After the first day he never comes back; none of the Ewells still in school come but for the first day.  Burris has been in the first grade for three years now.  Miss Caroline learns that Burris’s mother is dead and his father is a low-class white man who drinks a lot.  Miss Caroline tries to get Burris to sit back down, but he gets angry and mean.  Little Chuck, another student in the class, helps Miss Caroline and tells Burris to go home menacingly.  Burris made Miss Caroline cry and after Burris left, we all tried to comfort her.
	After school let out, we went home and made sure to run past the Radley’s house.  We met Atticus when he got home from work.  Calpurnia had made a special treat of mine for dinner and I was sure that Calpurnia had seen her errors in the way she treated me at lunch.
	That night, Atticus asked me if I was ready to read with him.  I got real uncomfortable.  Atticus noticed that something was bothering me so he asked me what was wrong.  I told him all that had happened in the day and even the part about Miss Caroline saying that he had taught me all wrong so we couldn’t read together anymore.  I told Atticus that I didn’t want to go to school anymore.  Atticus tries to interpret some of the confusing episodes of the day for me.  He says, “If you can learn a simple trick Scout, you’ll get along a lot better with all kinds of folks.  You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view -- … until you climb into his skin and walk around in it.” (p. 30).  I learned that the Cuninghams are poor but honest people and that Miss Caroline made some honest mistakes.  We couldn’t expect her to have learned all the ways of Maycomb in one day.
	On the conversation of the Ewells, Atticus says that the law bends a little for them.  The people allow them certain privileges by being a Ewell and living in their situation.  They don’t have to go to school and Mr. Bob Ewell, the father, is permitted to hunt and trap animals out of season.  He is allowed to do this because he spends all of his welfare money on whiskey and his children to hungry.  The food that he hunts goes to feeding his children so nobody would say that he can’t hunt even if it is out of season.  Atticus says that you can’t punish the children for the father’s faults.
	Atticus and I made a compromise.  If I agreed to go to school, then we could continue reading together each night, but we better keep it a secret.
 

Chapter 4
	My school year went on pretty uneventfully.  One day while walking home alone, I ran past the Radley’s house as I normally do.  This time, however, something caught my eye.  I took a deep breath, turned around, and went back.
	Next to the Radley house there were two tall oak trees.  One of the trees had a knot-hole and there was some shiny tinfoil sticking out of it.  I stuck my hand in the knot-hole and pulled out two pieces of chewing gum (Wrigley’s Double-Mint).  I quickly snatched it up and ran home, even though I wanted to cram it into my mouth.  Once I got to the porch, I inspected my find.  I sniffed and licked it, and when I didn’t die, I put the gum in my mouth.
	Jem came home and wondered where I got the gum.  I finally told him that I found it in the Radley’s tree.  Jem yells, “Spit it out right now!  Don’t you know you’re not supposed to even touch the trees over there?  You’ll get killed if you do!” and I obeyed.
	
	Summer was on the way, which was our favorite season.  It also meant that Dill was on the way.  On the last day of school, we were let out early.  As Jem and I walked past the Radley’s oak trees, I saw shiny tinfoil again in the knot-hole.  We both ran over, grabbed the prize and hurried home to examine it.  It was a small jewelry box covered in tinfoil wrappers.  Inside the box were two Indian-head pennies that were really old.  Since this was pretty special, I began to think that this knot-hole might be someone’s special hiding place.  We tried to think of who walked that way and who might be using this as their hiding spot.  We didn’t know if we should keep them or put them back.  Jem suggested that they keep them until school starts and then ask everyone if they’re theirs.  I noticed Jem looking back at the Radley’s house for a long time and seemed to be real thoughtful.
	Dill Finally arrives!  Miss Rachel picks him up and we meet up with him a little later.  Dill suggests picking up where they left off play-acting, but I’m tired of those.  I thought it would be fun to roll in the tire.  “I’m first!”  I announced.  I folded myself in the tire and Jem pushed me hard down the sidewalk.  I was getting dizzy and couldn’t get it to stop because it was going so fast.  I hear Jem yelling behind me.  All of a sudden I bumped into something and stopped.  I lay on the cement for a while and hear Jem’s voice:  “Scout, get away from there, come on!”  I opened my eyes and realized I was at the front of the Radley’s steps.  Jem came to get me and panicked.  We both scurried out of there without the tire.  Jem and I argued about who should go back and get the tire.  Jem scowled and went back for it.  He told me I was acting like a girl and there was nothing to it.
	Calpurnia called us in for some lemonade.  As we enjoyed our lemonade, Jem decided that we should play Boo Radley.  What he meant was that we would play act using the Radleys as our characters.  All throughout the summer we perfected our act.  We added dialogue and made it long.  One day when we were rehearsing one act, Atticus watched us.  He told us that he hoped we were not pay acting about the Radleys, Jem and I argued over whether or not we should continue acting this out since Atticus told us not to.
	Atticus’s seeing us do this play-acting was the first reason I wanted to stop doing this.  The second reason had to do with what happened earlier that day.  After I rolled into the Radley’s yard, I heard not only Jem’s voice yelling but also another sound.  It was a soft sound.  Someone inside of the house was laughing.
 

Chapter 5
	So, I thought we should stop playing “Boo Radley” because Atticus had warned us not to.  Jem said we should just change the names of the characters and then nobody would know!  Dill agreed. Dill, by the way, was being annoying.  He had asked me earlier in the summer to marry him, then he promptly forgot about it.  He had said I was the only girl he would ever love, but then he ignored me.  I beat him up twice but it did no good, he kept becoming better friends with Jem.  
	Since Dill and Jem were becoming so close, I was beginning to feel left out.  So I spent some time becoming friendly with Miss Maudie Atkinson.  Miss Maudie was a nice lady who lived across the street.  She had always let us play in her yard, but we had never really been close to her. Now Maudie hated being indoors.  She thought that time spent indoors was time wasted.  She was a widow who worked in her garden wearing an old straw hat and men’s overalls.  She was pretty cool.  She was honest, treated us with respect, and didn’t like gossip.
	One day I noticed that Miss Maudie had two minute gold prongs clipped to her eyeteeth.  When I admired them and hoped I would have some eventually, she said, “Look here.”  With a click of her tongue she thrust out her dentures.  Cool!  I think that was her way of letting me know that she really considered me a friend!
	Miss Maudie made the best cakes in the neighborhood.  She would yell, “Jem Finch, Scout Finch, Charles Baker Harris, come here!”  That meant that she had baked some small cakes for us, and we went running!
	One evening I asked, “Miss Maudie, do you think Boo Radley’s still alive?”
	“His name’s Arthur and he’s alive,” she said.
	“How do you know?”
	“What a morbid question.  I know he’s alive, Jean Louise, because I haven’t seen anyone carry out a body!”
	“Jem said that maybe he died and they stuffed him up in the chimney”, I added.
	Miss Maudie said, “Tsk. Tsk. Jem gets more like Jack Finch every day.  They’re both such wise-guys!”
	Jack Finch was my uncle, Atticus’s brother, and Miss Maudie had known him since they were children.  Miss Maudie had grown up near Finch’s Landing and used to play with Jack.  Uncle Jack visited our house every Christmas, and every Christmas he yelled across the street for Miss Maudie to come marry him.  He was such a jokester!  Miss Maudie would call back, “Call a little louder, Jack Finch, and they’ll hear you at the post office!”
	Miss Maudie continued her answer about Boo Radley.  “Arthur Radley just stays in the house, that’s all.  Wouldn’t you stay in the house if you didn’t want to come out?”
	“Yessum, but I’d wanta come out.  Why doesn’t he?”
	Miss Maudie explained that Mr. Radley was a “foot-washing Baptist” which means that he believes anything that’s a pleasure is a sin.  She said that some of those Baptists even passed by her house once and told her that she and her flowers were going to hell.  They thought that Miss Maudie spent too much time outdoors and not enough time inside the house reading the Bible.
	Miss Maudie said that these people were taking the Bible too literally.  She said, “Sometimes the Bible in the hand of one man is worse than a whiskey bottle in the hand of – oh, of someone like your father.”  She also said that “there are just some kind of men who—who’re so busy worrying about the next world that they’ve never learned to enjoy this one.  Like the Radleysv.”
	Miss Maudie said that all the stories about Boo were gossip – from people like Stephanie Crawford, who was always in everybody’s business.  She said that she remembered Arthur as a really nice boy.
	The next day I caught Jem and Dill planning something.  They finally told me what it was.  They were going to try to get a note to Boo Radley!!  They were going to put the note on the end of a fishing pole and stick it through the shutters.  If anyone came along the street, Dill would ring the bell to warn Jem.  Dill explained what the note said, “We’re askin’ him real politely to come out sometimes, and tell us what he does in there – we said we wouldn’t hurt him and we’d buy him an ice cream.”  I told Dill that he and jem were crazy and that Boo would kill us!
	I was watching Jem try to get the note in the window, when all of a sudden we heard Dill ringing his bell!  I thought I would turn around to see Boo Radley with bloody fangs; instead, I saw Dill ringing the bell with all his might in Atticus’s face.  Uh, oh!
	When Atticus found out what we were trying to do, he told Jem to stop tormenting Arthur Radley.  He continued on, saying that what Arthur did was his own business, not ours.  If he wanted to come out, he would, and if he didn’t, he had a right to stay inside without inquisitive children harassing him.  He ended by saying that he did not want to see us playing the asinine game he had seen us playing or make fun of anybody on this street or in this town!!
	Jem said, “We weren’t making fun of him, we were just…”
	“So that WAS what you were doing, wasn’t it?  You were acting out the Radley’s life story as I suspected!” said Atticus accusingly.
	Jem got flustered and realized that Atticus had tricked him into admitting that the “game” they had been playing was really us acting out the gossip we had heard about the Radley family.  When Atticus said, “You want to be a lawyer, don’t you,” Jem realized that Atticus had used the oldest lawyer’s trick on him!  Atticus had pretended he knew we were playing Boo Radley, when really he only suspected it, and then Jem confessed without realizing!
 

Chapter 6
	On Dill’s last night with us that summer, before he went back to Mississippi to start school, Dill noticed Mr. Avery on his front porch.  Dill said, “Golly, looka yonder.”  At first we saw nothing, but then we saw an arc of water falling from the leaves and splashing into the yellow circle of the street light ten feet away.  Dill said, “Mrs. Avery must drink a gallon a day!”  So I realized that Mr. Avery was peeing off his porch!!  And then Dill and Jem argued over which one of them could pee further, and of course I felt left out again being a girl and all.
	Later that night Dill and Jem said they were going to peep in the Radley’s window to see if they could get a look at Boo.  They said that if I didn’t want to go with them I could go straight home and keep my mouth shut about it.  I said, “Jem, don’t…”
	Jem said, “Scout, I’m telling you for the last time, shut your trap or go home – I declare to the Lord you’re gettin’ more like a girl every day!”  So, I shut up and joined them.  We snuck under a barbed wire fence and through a creaky gate into the Radley’s yard.  We had to be very quiet, and I was so nervous!  We gave Dill a boost up to look in the window, but he didn’t see anything.  So we went around back and Jem crept across the porch and peeked in a window.  That was when I noticed the shadow.  It was the shadow of a man with a hat on, and it was moving towards Jem!  The moonlight was bright enough to make shadows that night.  Dill noticed it too, and then Jem.  We were petrified!!  The shadow stopped about a foot beyond Jem.  Its arm came out from its side, dropped, and was still.  Then it turned and moved back across Jem, walked along the porch and off the side of the house, returning as it had come.
	We all made a run for it!  We ran to the gate, and as we ran through the collards, I tripped.  Then I heard the roar of a shotgun!  We all scurried toward the barbed wire fence, but Jem got caught in it as he tried to go under.  His pants were caught and he couldn’t get them free, so he kicked his pants off and started running in his underwear!
	After resting for a minute, we realized that because of the shotgun noise, the whole neighborhood was standing around in the Radley’s front yard to see what was going on.  We realized that we had better show up or else people might start to realize that it was US sneaking around in their yard!  When we got there we saw Mr. Nathan Radley (Boo’s older brother ) standing with a shotgun by his side.  Atticus was there, and Miss Maudie, Miss Stephanie Crawford, Miss Rachel (Dill’s aunt), and Mr. Avery.
	“What happened,” asked Jem, as if he didn’t know.
	Miss Maudie replied, “Mrs. Radley says he shot at a Negro in his collard patch.”
	“Did he hit him?”
	“No,” said Miss Stephanie.  “Shot in the air.  Scared him pale, though.  Says if anybody sees a white n****r around, that’s the one.  Says he’s got another bullet waitin’ for the next sound he ears in that patch, an’ next time he won’t aim high, be it dog, n****r, or – Jem Finch!?”  Miss Stephanie had just noticed Jem standing there without any pants on!
	“Yes, Ma’am?” asked Jem.
	Atticus spoke.  “Where’re your pants, son?”
	Dill spoke up quickly.  He thought of a good excuse so nobody would suspect that it was really US in the Radley’s yard.  He told everyone that he had won Jem’s pants from him in a game of strip poker.  Jem and I relaxed, thinking this was a good excuse.
	But Miss Rachel, Dill’s aunt, was very upset.  She didn’t think we should be playing poker!!  Gambling was a bad thing!!  But we said we were only betting with matches, not with real money.  So they calmed down a little.  Sure, matches were dangerous, but gambling was really dangerous!!  Kids shouldn’t be gambling!  It is kind of ironic that they’re more concerned about us playing with cards than about us playing with matches!!
	In the middle of the night, Jem had to sneak out to go back and get his pants, which were still stuck in the Radley’s fence.  If he didn’t get the pants back, Atticus would know that Dill’s strip poker excuse wasn’t true.  He didn’t want Atticus to find out what he had done because he knew Atticus would be very disappointed in him.  Jem said we shouldn’t have gone to the Radley place like that.  It was wrong.  I was scared to let Jem go back there alone in the middle of the night, but he went anyway.  After a while, he came back and crept into bed.   Thank goodness!
 

Chapter 7
	I left Jem alone when he got back from the Radley’s.  I tried to do as Atticus taught me and walk around in Jem’s skin.  I tried to imagine what it would have been like to go back to the Radley’s in the middle of the night.  I would have been terrified so I let Jem alone.

	I started school again:  the 2nd grade.  It was just as bad as the first grade.  I was still not allowed to read, but one good thing was that I stayed as late as Jem and we walked home together.  On our way home one afternoon, Jem told me what happened that night.
	“When I went back for my breeches – they were all in a tangle when I was getting’ out of ‘em, I couldn’t get them loose.  When I went back-“  Jem took a deep breath.  “When I went back, they were folded across the fence… like they were expectin’ me.”
	“Across—“
	“And something else – “Jem’s voice was flat.  “Show you when we get home.  They’d been sewed up.  Not like a lady sewed ‘em, like somethin’ I’d try to do.  All crooked.  It’s almost like –“
	“—somebody knew you were comin’ back for ‘em.”
	Jem shuddered.  “Like somebody was readin’ my mind… like somebody could tell what I was gonna do.  Can’t anybody tell what I’m gonna do lest they live in the house with you, and even I can’t tell sometimes.”
	We kept walking and noticed in the knot-hole of the tree that there was a ball of gray twine.  I didn’t think we should take it ‘cuz it’s probably someone’s hiding place.  Jem and I decided to leave it there for a few days and if it was still there then we’d take it.  The next day it was still there so we considered anything else we found there was ours to take from then on.
	Second grade was not great.  Jem told me that you don’t learn anything of value until 6th grade which is what he was in.  He was learning about Egyptians and thought they were the smartest since they invented all kinds of great things.
	One day in October we were walking by the tree in the Radley’s yard and noticed something white in the knot-hole.  I pulled out two small images carved in soap.  One was the figure of a boy and the other was in a crude dress.  Jem told me that he had never seen anything as good as these before.  As I looked closer, the boy figure was wearing shorts and this hair fell to his eyebrows.  I gazed up at Jem and noticed his hair parted down to his eyebrows too.  Jem looked from the girl-doll to me.  The goril-doll wore bangs.  So did I.
	“These are us,” he said.
	“Who did ‘em, you reckon?”
	“Who do we know around here who whittles?” he asked.
	“Mr. Avery.”
	“Mrs. Avery just does like this.  I mean carves.”
	We took the figures home and Jem put them in his trunk.  We didn’t’ know who could have done these carvings. 
	A week or so later we found a whole package of chewing gum in the knot-hole, which we enjoyed.  The following week we found a tarnished medal.  We showed it to Atticus and he said it was a spelling medal, that before we were born the Maycomb County schools had spelling contests and awarded medals to the winners.  Atticus told us that someone must have lost it but he didn’t remember anybody who had ever won one. 
	The biggest treasure we found in the knot-hole came four days later.  We found a pocket watch that wouldn’t run, on a chain with an aluminum knife.  Atticus thought it would probably be worth ten dollars. 
	Jem thought it would be a good idea if we wrote a letter to whoever’s leaving these things.  I thought that would be a nice idea to thank ‘em.
	“I don’t get it, I just don’t get it – I don’t know why, Scout…” He looked toward the living room.  “I’ve gotta good mind to tell Atticus – no, I reckon not.” 
	“He had been on the verge of telling me something all evening; his fact would brighten and he would lean toward me, then he would change his mind.  He changed it again. 
	The next morning we took our letter to the knot-hole and were shocked to see it filled with cement.
	“Don’t you cry, now, Scout…don’t cry now, don’t worry –“ he muttered at me all the way to school.
	The next day we finally saw Mr. Radley.
	“Hidy do, Mr. Nathan,“ he said.
	“Morning Jem, Scout,” said Mr. Radley, as he went by.
	“Mr. Radley,” said Jem.
	Mr. Radley turned around.
	“Mr. Radley, ah – did you put cement in that hole in that tree down yonder?”
	“Yes,” he said.  “I filled it up.”
	“Why’d you do it, sir?”
	“Tree’s dying.  You plug ‘em with cement when they’re sick.  You ought to know that, Jem.”
	We went on to school not saying a thing.  After school we ran into Atticus and Jem asked him, “Atticus, look down yonder at that tree please, sir.”
	“What tree, son?”
	“The one on the corner of the Radley lot comin’ from school.”
	“Yes?”
	“Is that tree dyin’?”
	“Why no, son, I don’t think so.  Look at the leaves, they’re all green and full, no brown patches anywhere—”
	“It ain’t even sick?”
	“That tree’s as healthy as you are, Jem. Why?”
	“Mr. Nathan Radley said it was dyin’.”
	“Well maybe it is.  I’m sure Mr. Radley knows more about his trees that we do.”
	Atticus left us then and eventually I told Jem to come on inside.  He told me he would after a while. 
	He stood there until nightfall and I noticed when he came in he had been crying, but I thought it odd that I had not heard him.
 

Chapter 8
	It was one of the coldest winters Maycomb County had seen in awhile.  It as also the winter that Mrs. Radley died.  No one really noticed because she was rarely seen.  Jem and I thought that Boo had finally gotten her.
	The next morning I woke up with a fright.  I screamed and Atticus came running from the bathroom.
	“The world’s endin’, Atticus!  Please do something—!”  I dragged him to the window and pointed.
	“No it’s not,” he said.  “It’s snowing.”
	The phone rang and Eula May, the telephone operator, called and said there would be no school.  Jem and I ran to the backyard and it was covered with a feeble layer of soggy snow.  We decided to make a snowman.  Atticus didn’t think we’d have enough snow to make a snowball.
	Miss Maudie yelled over to be careful with her flowers.  She was not happy about the snow and was worried about the snow and freeze ruining her azaleas.  We asked her if we could borrow some of her snow for our snowman.  Jem filled five laundry baskets with earth and two with snow.  
	“Don’t you think this is kind of a mess?”  I asked.
	“Looks messy now, but it won’t later,” he said.
	Jem scooped up an armful of dirt and patted it into a round shape for the torso.
	“Jem, I ain’t ever heard of a n****r snowman,” I said.
	“He won’t be black long,” he grunted.
	We couldnt’ wait for Atticus to come home and see our creation.  Atticus complimented Jem and thought whatever he ended up being in life, he’d never run out of ideas.  Atticus told us we needed to disguise our snowman by putting an apron and broom since it looked too much like Mr. Avery.
	It was one of the coldest nights in Maycomb’s history.  I went to bed and minutes later, it seemed, I was awakened.  “Is it morning already?”
	“Baby, get up.”
	Atticus was holding out my bathrobe and coat.  “Put your robe on first,” he said.
	We went to the front door and Miss Maudie’s house was on fire.  Atticus told us to go down and stand in front of the Radley’s house.  All the men were trying to help by carrying out her furniture and the fire truck was having difficulty with it being cold and all.  Mr. Avery got wedged in the window trying to get out of the house and we were scared for him.  He finally got free.
	I became aware that I was slowly freezing.  Jem tried to keep me warm but I was still cold.  
	It was dawn before the men began to leave.  Miss Maudie’s house was destroyed so she would be staying with Miss Stephanie for the time being.
	Atticus looked over at me with curiosity and then sternness.  “I thought I told you and Jem to stay put,” he said.
	“Why, we did.  We stayed –“
	“Then whose blanket is that?”
	“Blanket?”
	“Yes, Ma’am, blanket.  It isn’t ours.”
	I saw that I was clutching a brown woolen blanket and was just as bewildered as Atticus.  We hadn’t moved an inch and Jem didn’t know how it got there too.  Atticus grinned and said, “look like all of Maycomb was out tonight, in one way or another…”
	Jem seemed to have lost his mind.  He started telling Atticus all of our secrets.  About the hiding place, Mrs. Radley covering the knot-hole with cement, pants and all.
	Atticus told him to slow down and that it is probably a good idea that we keep the blanket to ourselves.  “Someday, maybe, Scout can thank him for covering her up.”
	“Thank who?” I asked.
	“Boo Radley.  You were so busy looking at the fire you didn’t know it when he put the blanket around you.”
	I got all nervous and almost threw up with the thought.
	Miss Maudie had a positive outlook on what happened to her house.  She was actually happy now because she would have more room for her flowers now that she can build a smaller house.  The only thing she was worried about was all the danger and commotion it caused.  Miss Maudie continued working on her garden and yard.
 

Chapter 9

	I was ready to punch Cecil Jacobs in the face.  He had announced in the schoolyard the day before the Scout Finch’s daddy defended n*****s, Atticus?”
	I asked Atticus, “Do you defend n*****s, Atticus?”
	Atticus replied, “Of course I do.  Don’t say n****r, Scout.  That’s common.”
	“’s what everybody at school says.”
	“From now on it’ll be everybody less one –“
	“Well if you don’t want me to grow up talkin’ that way, why do you send me to school?”
	Atticus looked at me amused.  Atticus said that he was defending a Negro by the name of Tom Robinson.  He lives in the settlement beyond the town dump.  He goes to Calpurnia’s church and she knows his family well.  She says that they are clean living folk.  There are people who say I shouldn’t defend him.
	“If you shouldn’t be defendin’ him, then why are you doin’ it?”
	“For a number of reasons,” said Atticus.  “The main one is, if I didn’t I couldn’t hold up my head in town, I couldn’t even represent this county in legislature, I couldn’t even tell you or Jem not to do something again.”
	“You mean if you didn’t defend that man, Jem and me wouldn’t have to mind you any more?”
	“That’s about right.”
	“Why?”
	“Because I could never ask you to mind me again.   Scout simply because of the nature of the work, every lawyer gets at least one case in his lifetime that affects him personally.  This one’s mine, I guess.  You might hear some ugly talk about it at school, but do one thing for me if you will:  you just hold your head high and keep those fists down.  No matter what anybody says to you, don’t let ‘em get your goat.  Try fighting with your head for a change… it’s a good one even if it does resist learning.
	“Atticus, are we going to win it?”
	“No, honey.”
	“Then why –“
	“Simply because we were licked a hundred years before we started is no reason for us not to try to win,” Atticus said.
	I tried to keep this in mind when I wanted to fight Cecil Jacobs in the schoolyard.  I knew that if I did fight him, I would be letting Atticus down.
	Christmas was coming and I felt mixed about it.  On the good side, Uncle Jack Finch was coming and he would spend a week with us.  On the bad side, we would have to see Aunt Alexandra and Francis.  We went to Finch’s Landing every Christmas day.  I didn’t like spending time with Francis.  He was a year older than I and I avoided him.
	Aunt Alexandra was Atticus’s sister and Francis was her grandson.  I was sure she was swapped at birth and that my grandparents had gotten the wrong child.  Uncle Jack was the baby of the family.
	We were on our way to pick up Uncle Jack at the train station on Christmas Eve.  He had two packages with him.  I was curious about what they were.  When we got home we decorated the tree until bedtime.  The next morning we dived for the packages.  They were from Atticus.  He had Uncle Jack get them for us.  We had asked for them – air rifles.
	We got to Finch’s Landing.  I asked Francis what he got for Christmas.  “Just what I asked for,” he said.  Francis had requested a pair of knee-pants, a red leather booksack, five shirts and an untied bow tie.
	“That’s nice,” I lied.  “Jem and me got air rifles, and Jem got a chemistry set –“
	“A toy one, I reckon.”
	“No, a real one.”  He’s gonna make me some invisible ink and I’m gonna write to Dill in it.”
	Francis was such a boring child.  He told Aunt Alexandra everything he knew and Aunt Alexandra then told Atticus.  She didn’t like the way I dressed in overalls and that I couldn’t possibly hope to be a lady if I wore breeches.  Aunt Alexandra’s vision of me involved playing with small stoves, tea sets, and wearing the Add-A-Pearl necklace she gave me when I was born.
	Francis really got me angry.  First he talked bad about Dill and then about Atticus defending Tom Robinson.  “Grandma says it’s bad enough he lets you run wild, but now he’s turned out a n****r-lover we’ll never be able to walk the streets of Maycomb again.  He’s ruinin’ the family, that’s what he’s doin’.”
	I got so mad at him I chased him to the kitchen that is separate from the house.  He kept calling Atticus a “n****r-lover” and I had to punch him in the face.  I got punished by Uncle Jack and told him I hated him.  He didn’t listen to my side of the sotry.  I ran to Atticus for comfort and finally told Uncle Jack my side of the story.  Uncle Jack got real mad at Francis when he found out what he had said about Atticus.  He was going to tell Atticus, but I begged him not to.  I would prefer him to think that Francis and I fought over something else.
	Later when Atticus and Jack were talking, Jack didn’t tell Atticus the specifics of his and my conversation, but he did say that he learned a lot from me today.  He was also upset that Jem and I were going to have to learn about some ugly things in our lives.  Atticus hoped that Jem and I would go to him to get answers about what is going to happen in the trial rather than learning it from the town.
 

Chapter 10

	Atticus was old and feeble:  he was nearly fifty.  Jem and I were disappointed that he wasn’t more like the younger fathers in Maycomb.  Atticus was always too tired to play football with Jem like the other dads.  He wore glasses because he was nearly blind in his left eye.
	When he gave us our air-rifles Atticus wouldn’t teach us to shoot.  Uncle Jack taught us and explained that Atticus wasn’t interested in guns.  Atticus said to Jem one day, “I’d rather you shot at tin cans in the back yard, but I know you’ll go after birds.  Shoot all the bluejays you want, if you can hit ‘em, but remember it’s a sin to kill a mockingbird.”
	Later I asked Miss Maudie why Atticus said that.  She said, “Your father’s right.  Mockingbirds don’t do one thing but make music for us to enjoy.  They don’t eat up people’s gardens; they don’t do one thing but sing their hearts out for us.  That’s why it’s a sin to kill a mockingbird.”
	I complained to Miss Maudie that Atticus was too old to do anything.  She said that he was a great lawyer and the best checker-player in town and that I should be proud of him.
	One day Jem and I were walking down the street with our new air-rifles and Jem spotted something.  “Whatcha looking at?”  I asked.
	“That old dog down yonder,” he said.
	“That’s Harry Johnson’s dog who’s named Tim Johnson, ain’t it?”
	The dog was acting strangely, and Jem got worried, thinking it might have rabies.  He called to Cal to come out in the street to look at the dog.
	When Calpurnia saw the dog, she was sure it had rabies.  She called on the telephone to Atticus’s office.  “Mr. Finch!  This is Cal.  I swear to God there’s a mad dog down the street a piece – he’s comin’ this way – it’s old Tim Johnson.”  Then Cal called the operator and asked her to call Miss Rachel (Dill’s aunt) and Miss Stephanie Crawford and anyone else on the street to warn them to lock their doors and stay inside.  It is very dangerous for anyone to be bitten by a dog with rabies.
	Mr. Heck Tate was the sheriff of Maycomb County.  He showed up with a rifle.  Atticus showed up as well.  The dog was pretty far down the street, but it was headed towards the Finch’s place.  Atticus told Heck that he better go ahead and shoot the dog – put it out of its misery.  But Heck handed the rifle to Atticus and said, “Take him, Mr. Finch.”  Jem and I couldn’t believe that Heck would want our father to try to shoot!!
	Atticus said, “Don’t be silly, Heck.  You shoot him.”
	“Mr. Finch, this is a one-shot job.”
	Atticus shook his head vehemently.  “Don’t just stand there, Heck!  He won’t wait all day for you—“
	Heck said, “For God’s sake, Mr. Finch, look where he is!  If I miss, the bullet will go straight into the Radley house!  I can’t shoot that well and you know it!”
	Atticus replied, “I haven’t shot a gun in thirty years –“
	Mr. Tate almost threw the rifle at Atticus.  “I’d feel mighty comfortable if you did now,” he said.
	Jem and I watched our father take the gun and walk out into the middle of the street.  He walked quickly, but I felt like I was watching the whole thing in slow motion.  I couldn’t understand why the sheriff would want Atticus to do the shooting.
	Atticus pushed his glasses to his forehead; they slipped down, and he dropped them in the street.  In the silence, I heard them crack.  Atticus rubbed his eyes and chin; we saw him blink hard.  With movements so swift they seemed simultaneous, Atticus’s hand yanked a ball-tipped lever as he brought the gun to his shoulder.  The rifle cracked.  Tim Johnson leaped, flopped over and crumpled on the sidewalk in a brown-and-white heap.  He died instantly.  Atticus had shot him right between the eyes!
	Mr. Tate said, “You haven’t forgot much, Mr. Finch.  You’re still a great shooter.”
	Miss Maudie yelled across the street, “I saw that, One –Shot Finch!”
	Jem was totally stunned!  So was I.  Mr. Tate saw our shock and said, “What’s the matter with you, boy, can’t you talk?  Didn’t you know your daddy’s –“
	Atticus interrupted, “Hush, Heck.  Let’s go back to work.”
	After Atticus and Mr. Tate left Miss Maudie told us that Atticus was known as Ol’ One-Shot because when he was younger, he was the best shot in all of Maycomb.  We were so impressed!  When I asked why he never goes hunting, Miss Maudie said, “If your father’s anything, he’s civilized in his heart.  Shooting is a gift of God – a talent – oh, you have to practice to make it perfect, but shootin’s different from playing the pinao.  I think maybe Atticus put down his gun when he realized that God had given him an unfair advantage over most living things.  I guess he decided he wouldn’t shoot till he had to, and he had to today.”
	I said, “It seems like he should be proud of his talent.”
	Miss Maudie relplied, “People in their right minds never take pride in their talents.”
	I didn’t understand all of this, and I told Jem that we sure would have something to brag about at school on Monday – now that we knew our dad was the best shooter in Maycomb.  But Jem told me not to say anything at school.  He seemed to think that bragging wasn’t so important anymore, that it wasn’t a very grown-up thing to do.  He said, “Atticus is real old, but I wouldn’t care if he couldn’t do anything – I wouldn’t care if he couldn’t do a blessed thing.  Atticus is a gentleman, just like me!”  It seems Jem realized that a gentleman doesn’t brag about his talents, and doesn’t use his talents to take advantage of other people or animals.

 
Chapter 11
	
	Mrs. Dubose lived two doors down from us.  She was a mean lady.  She lived alone except for a Negro girl who took care of her.   Mrs. Dubose was very old.  She spent most of her day in bed and the rest of it in a wheelchair.  There was a rumor that she kept a pistol hidden in her shawl.   
	Jem and I hated her.  Whenever we passed her house, she would glare at us and ask us questions about what we were doing.  She would say we were up to no good.  She said we wouldn’t grow up to be anything good.  Even if I tried to be nice and say, “Hey, Mrs. Dubose,” she would yell at me, “Don’t you say hey to me, you ugly girl!  You say good afternoon, Mrs. Dubose!”  She called us sassy, disrespectful mutts and that it was a disgrace that Atticus let us run wild.
	When Jem complained once to Atticus about the way she treated us, he said, “Easy does it, Son.  She’s an old lady and she’s ill.  You just hold your head high and be a gentleman.  Whatever she says to you, it’s your job not to let her make you mad.”  And when Atticus passed her place, he would sweep off his hat, wave gallantly to her and say, “Good evening, Mrs. Dubose!  You look like a picture this evening.”  (I never heard Atticus say a picture of what though!!)  It was times like these when I thought my father, who hated guns and had never been to any wars, was the bravest man who ever lived. 
	One day, Jem and I were walking by her place when she asked us where we were going.  She gave us a hard time and we tried to be nice.  But then she started yelling, “Don’t you lie to me! Jeremy Finch, Maudie Atkinson told me you broke down her flowers this morning. She’s going to tell your father and then you’ll wish you were never born!  I bet he’ll send you to reform school!”  Jem knew that none of this was true and told Mrs. Dubose that he hadn’t ruined Miss Maudie’s flowers. 
	“Don’t you contradict me!!”  Mrs. Dubose yelled.  “And YOU—” she pointed an arthritic finger at me…”What are you doing in those overalls??  You should be in a dress, young lady!”
	Jem pulled me along and said, “Come on, Scout.  Don’t pay any attention to her, just hold your head high and be a gentleman.”
	But Mrs. Dubose yelled, “Not only will you grow up to be nothing, but your father is defending a n****r!  Your father is no better than the n****s and trash he works for!”  Jem and I couldn’t believe that Mrs. Dubose could be so mean and so racist.
	On our way by her house later in the day, Mrs. Dubose was not on the porch.  Jem was overcome with anger for what she had said about Atticus, and broke the promise he had made to Atticus to hold his head high and be a gentleman.  He took my baton and used it to ruin Mrs. Dubose’s camellia bush.  He cut the flowers off of every bush in her yard.  He was so mad!
	We went home and waited nervously for Atticus.  We were scared of what he would do when he found out about what Jem did.  Finally Atticus showed up holding a camellia flower.  “Are you responsible for this?”
	“Yes sir,” Jem replied quietly.
	“Why’d you do it?”
	Jem said softly, “She said you lawed for n****s and trash.”  Jem was obviously feeling really bad about what he had done.  He had his head down.
	Atticus said, “I understand that people have been giving you a hard time about the fact that I’m defending Tom Robinson, but to do something like this to a sick old lady is inexcusable.  I strongly advise you to go down and have a talk with Mrs. Dubose.  Come straight home afterward.”
	Once Jem had gone, Atticus and I talked.  He said, “Scout, when summer comes you’ll have to keep your head about far worse things because that’s when Tom Robinson’s trial will be.  I know it’s not fair to you and Jem, but sometimes we have to make the best of things, and I have to defend Tom Robinson because it’s the right thing to do.  I couldn’t live with myself if I didn’t do the right thing.  Even though other people might think I’m wrong for defending a black man, I know that it’s right. 
	When Jem came back, he told us that Mrs. Dubose wanted Jem to read out loud to her as punishment for what he had done.  He had to go every afternoon and Saturdays for one month and read out loud for two hours each time.  Atticus said that Jem would have to go.
	So I went to Mrs. Dubose’s house with Jem.  Mrs. Dubose was in bed, and for a minute I felt kind of sorry for her, until she said, “So you brought that dirty little sister of yours, did you?”
	Jem began reading and Mrs. Dubose would correct him sometimes.  But after a while, we noticed that she wasn’t listening.  She seemed to be in a lot of pain or something and kind of unconscious.  Then the alarm clock went off, Jessie her helper came in and told us that it was time for her medicine and that we could go home.  We noticed that this same thing happened each day, except the alarm clock would go off later and later.
	One day I asked Atticus what “N****r-lover” meant because Mrs. Dubose had called him that once.  Atticus said, “Scout, n****r-lover is just one of those terms that don’t mean anything—like snot-nose.  It’s hard to explain—ignorant, trashy people us it when they think somebody’s favoring Negroes over and above themselves.  It’s an ugly work to use, and you or I should never say it.”
	We finally finished our month of reading to Mrs. Dubose.  One day a month later Atticus was called down to Mrs. Dubose’s house and he came back carrying a box.  He told us that Mrs. Dubose had died.  He said that she had been sick for a long time and that her “fits” (when she would seem to be in pain and go unconscious) were because she had been addicted to morphine, a pain killer.  She was trying to break this addiction before she died.  Most people would have just kept taking the morphine so they wouldn’t have to be in pain during the last months of their life, but she wanted to die free of an addiction.  So, when she had Jem read to her, it was meant to distract her from the pain that not taking the morphine caused.  She would take the morphine later and later every day, which is why we had to read later and later before the alarm went off.  Atticus handed Jem the box he had brought back.  In it was a beautiful camellia flower.  Jem thought she had sent it to him to be mean, but really she was trying to say that she forgave him. 
	Atticus said, “You know, she was a great lady.”
	Jem asked, “How could you call her a lady after all those terrible things she said about you?!”
	“She was a lady.  She had her own view about things, a lot different from mine, maybe…son, I wanted you to read to her because I wanted you to learn something from her. I wanted you to see what real courage is, instead of getting the idea that courage is a man with a gun in his hand.  It’s when you know you’re licked before you begin but you begin anyway and you see it through no matter what.  You rarely win, but sometimes you do.  Mrs. Dubose won, all ninety-eight pounds of her.  She broke her addiction to morphine, which was a very hard thing to do.  She was the bravest person I ever knew.” Jem burned the box, but he kept touching the flower petals all night.

 

Part 2

Chapter 12
	Jem was twelve.  He was getting so moody and hard to live with.  After Mrs. Dubose had been dead for a couple of weeks, he started changing and telling me what to do.  Jem hollered, “It’s time you started bein’ a girl and acting right!”  I burst into tears and ran to Calpurnia.  Calpurnia told me not to fret, that he was growing up.  She even started calling him Mister Jem like he was a grown up.  I spend a lot of time with Calpurnia waiting for summer when Dill would come to Maycomb.
	Summer came and Dill had not come.  Dill sent a letter and said that he had a new father and that he would have to stay in Meridian.  The state legislature was called to an emergency session and Atticus left us for two weeks. 
	One Sunday we went with Calpurnia to her church.  She got us all clean and spent time going over our clothes.  My dress had so much starch in it, it came up like a tent when I sat down.
	“It’s like we were goin’ to Mardi Gras,” said Jem.  “What’s all this for, Cal?”
	“I don’t want anybody sayin’ I don’t look after my children,” she muttered.  “Mister Jem, you absolutely can’t wear that tie with that suit.  It’s green.”
	Calpurnia took us to First Purchase African M.E. Church.  It was called First Purchase because it was paid for from the first earnings of freed slaves.  Negroes worshipped in it on Sundays and white men gambled in it on weekdays.
	As we entered the churchyard, the men stepped back and took off their hats and the women crossed their arms at their wrists.  They made a pathway for us.  A woman’s voice came from behind us, “What you up to, Miss Cal?”
	“What you want, Lula?” she asked in a tone I had never heard.
	“I wants to know why you bringin’ white chillun to a n****r church.”
	“They’s my comp’ny,” said Calpurnia.  Again I thought her voice was strange: she was talking like the rest of them.
	“Yeah, an’ I reckon you’s comp’ny at the Finch house durin’ the week.”
	“Don’t you fret,” Calpurnia whispered to me and then said to Lula, “Stop right there, n****r.”
	Lula stopped and said, “You ain’t got no business bringing’ white chillun here – they got their church, we got our’n.  It is our church, ain’t it, Miss Cal?”
	We told Calpurnia that we wanted to go home that we weren’t welcome here.  When I looked up Calpurnia had amusement in her eyes and others were coming toward us.  Lula was gone and we were surrounded by others.  One of them, Zeebo, said to not pay attention to Lula and that they were glad to have us there.
	Inside church service was beginning.  Reverend Sykes started by making some announcements.  I noticed that there were no hymnals and when I went to ask Calpurnia about it, she told me to be quiet.  Reverend Sykes said that they would be taking up a collection today and for the next three Sundays for Tom Robinson to help out his wife, Helen, and family.
	Reverend Sykes said that we would begin services by singing hymn number two seventy-three.  This was too much for me.. “How’re we gonna sing it if there ain’t no hymn books?”
	Calpurnia smiled.  “Hush baby,” she whispered, “you’ll see in a minute.”
	Zeebo cleared this throat and read in a voice like the rumble of distant artillery,
	“There’s a land beyond the river.”
	Miraculously on pitch, a hundred voices sang out Zeebo’s words.  The last syllable, held to a hum, was followed by Zeebo saying, “That we call the sweet forever.”
	Music again swelled around us:  the last note lingered and Zeebo met it with the next line.
	Reverend Sykes went into his sermon and after that came the collection.  After the coffee can went around the church, Reverend Sykes emptied the coins into his hand and announced that it was not enough.  He said that we must have ten dollars.  He even had one of the church members close the doors until we had the ten dollars collected.  We put in our dimes.  Slowly and painfully the ten dollars was collected.
	At the end of service when we were all leaving, Reverend Sykes said to us, “We were ‘specially glad to have you all here,” said Reverend Sykes.  “The church has no better friend than your daddy.”
	My curiosity got to me and I asked, “Why were you all takin’ up a collection for Tom Robinson’s wife?”
	“Didn’t you hear why?” asked Reverend Sykes.  “Helen’s got three little’uns and she can’t go out to work—“
	“Why can’t she take ‘em with her, Reverend?”  I asked.  Callpurnia put her hand on my shoulder.  On the way home I asked Cal why no one would hire Helen.  She told us that it’s because of what folks say Tom’s done.  I didn’t know what Tom had done so I asked.  Cal sighted, “old Mr. Bob Ewell accused him of rapin’ his girl an’ had him arrested an’ put in jail—“
	“Mr. Ewell?”  I thought and remembered what Atticus had said that they were absolute trash and I had never heard Atticus talk about anyone like that before.  Cal said that I’d have to ask Atticus the questions about this.
	Calpurnia did explain why they sang hymns the way they did.  It’s called linin’ and it’s been done like that for as long as she can remember.  Jem thought it would be a good idea to take up a collection to get some hymn-books.  Cal said it would do no good since she only knows about four people who can read.  Zeebo, who is Calpurnia’s oldest son, was taught by her and Cal was taught by Miss Maudie’s aunt, old Miss Buford.
	Another thing I was curious about and had to ask Cal about it was the way she talked around the other colored folks.  “Cal,” I asked, “why to you talk n****r-talk to your folks when you know it’s not right?”
	“Well, in the first place, I’m black—“
	“That doesn’t mean you hafta talk that way when you know better,” said Jem.
	“It’s right hard to say,” she said.  “Suppose you and Scout talked colored-folks’ talk at home it’d be out of place, wouldn’t it?  Now what if I talked white-folks’ talk at church, and with my neighbors? They’d think I was puttin’ on airs to beat Moses.”
	“But Cal, you know better,” I said.
	“It’s not necessary to tell all you know.  It’s not ladylike—in the second place, folks don’t like to have somebody around knowin’ more than they do.  It aggravates ‘em.  You’re not gonna change any of them by talkin’ right, they’ve go to want to learn themselves, and when they don’t want to learn there’s nothing you can do but keep your mouth shut or talk their language.”
	As we approached the house Jem told me to look on the porch.  I looked and saw Aunt Alexandra sitting in a rocking chair.

 
Chapter 13

	Aunt Alexandra had Calpurnia put her bags in the front bedroom.  The next thing she did was to tell me to stop scratching my head.  I asked her if she was just here for a visit and she told us that she and Atticus had decided that she should come stay for awhile.  “We decided that it would be best for you to have some feminine influence.  It won’t be many years, Jean Louise, before you become interested in clothes and boys—“
	I thought many things to myself like the fact that I had Cal and that I wouldn’t be interested in boys for many years and that I would never be interested in clothes.  But I kept my mouth shut.  
	Later that afternoon Atticus came home.  He told us that they had decided it was best for Aunt Alexandra to stay with us.  I knew that it was more her idea than it was Atticus’s.  She had a way of deciding what was best for the family.
	Everyone in Maycomb welcomed Aunt Alexandra.  Miss Maudie baked a cake, Miss Rachel had her over for coffee, and Mr. Nathan Radley came in the front yard and said he was glad to see her.  
	Life resumed as if she had always lived with us.  Aunt Alexandra never missed a chance to point out the shortcomings of others.  Everyone in Maycomb seemed to have a Streak:  A Drinking Streak, a Gambling Streak, a Mean Streak, a Funny Streak.  She was also very occupied with heredity:  who came from what family.  I had received the impression the Fine Folks were people who did the best they could with the sense they had, but Aunt Alexandra was of the opinion that the longer a family had been squatting on one patch of land the finer it was.
	Some afternoons Aunty had the Maycomb ladies over.  “Jean Louise, come speak to these ladies.”
	When I came to the doorway, Aunt Alexandra looked like she almost regretted calling me over because I usually was mud-splattered or dirty.
	“Speak to your Cousin Lily,” she said one afternoon, when she had trapped me in the hall.
	“Who?” I said.
	“Your Cousin Lily Brooke,” said Aunt Alexandra.
	“She our cousin?  I didn’t know that.”
	Aunt Alexandra managed to smile to Cousin Lily that conveyed a gentle apology to her and a firm disapproval to me.  I knew I was in for it when Cousin Lily Left.
	That night Atticus came into Jem’s room where we both were.  He was uncomfortable and tried to tell us something.  “Your aunt has asked me to try and impress upon you and Jean Louise that you are not from run-of-the-mill people, that you are the product of several generations gentle breeding –“  Atticus paused.  “Gentle bredding,” he continued, “and that you should try to live up to your name—“  Atticus persevered in spite of us:  “She asked me to tell you you must try to behave like the little lady and gentleman that you are.  She wants to talk to you about the family and what it’s meant to Maycomb County through the years, so you’ll have some idea of who you are, so you might be moved to behave accordingly,” he concluded at a gallop.
	Stunned, Jem and I looked at each other and then at Atticus who was very uncomfortable.  I started to cry because this was not my father who thought these things.  Aunt Alexandra told him to do this.  I went to hug him and worried that all this behavin’ was going to change things and I said so.  Atticus told me not to worry.
	I asked, “You really want us to do all that?  I can’t remember everything Finches are supposed to do…”
	“I don’t want you to remember it.  Forget it.”
	He left Jem’s room.

Chapter 14

	One day I was in town with Jem and I overheard people talking about Atticus and how he was defending Tom Robinson who had been accused of raping a white woman.  I went home and asked Atticus what “rape” meant.  He said it was carnal knowledge of a female by force and without consent.  I didn’t know what he meant by that!
	I told him that Calpurnia didn’t tell me what it meant when we went to church.  I also told him that Cal said I could go to their house some time to visit her.  Aunt Alexandra, who was sitting with us knitting said, “You may NOT!”
	I got so mad!  I yelled, “I didn’t ask YOU!”
	Atticus jumped out of his chair and said, “You apologize to your aunt.”
	I argued, “But I didn’t ask her, I asked you.”
	Atticus said, “First, apologize to your aunt.”
	“I’m sorry, Aunty,” I muttered.
	Atticus said, “Now then.  Let’s get this clear: you do as Calpurnia tells you, you do as I tell you, and as long as your aunt’s in this house, you will do as she tells you.  Understand?”
	I nodded and went to the bathroom.  But I overheard Atticus and Aunt Alexandra talking after I left.  Aunt Alexandra was saying that Atticus better do something about me.  I wasn’t acting like a lady at all and that Atticus should fire Calpurnia because they didn’t need her anymore.
	Atticus said, “Alexandra, Cal’s not leaving this house until she wants to.  You may think otherwise, but we really need her and she is a great person who feels like a member of our family.  She’s done a great job of helping me raise the children.”
	Later Jem told me to try not to annoy Aunty.  I got so mad because he was trying to tell me what to do again.  But Jem explained that we shouldn’t do anything that would upset Atticus because he’s got a lot on his mind.  He’s worried about the Tom Robinson case.  Jem said, “Now I mean it , Scout, you bother Aunty and I’ll – I’ll spank you.”
	“You damn morphodite, I’ll kill you!” I yelled.  I was so mad that he was treating me like a little kid.  We got in a fight and were punching and kicking.  Finally Atticus came in and broke up the fight.
	Later that night I stepped on something near my bed and thought it was a snake.  I went to get Jem to check.  When he looked under there, he found DILL!!!  He was dirty and hungry.  He told this ridiculous story about how he had been tied up with chains in his basement by his new father and was kept alive by peas that a passing farmer would sneak in the window for him.  Dill said he had pulled the chains from the wall and escaped.  He wandered two miles and found a traveling animal show where he got a job washing a camel.  He traveled all over Alabama with the show until his infallible sense of direction told him that he was right near Maycomb.  So he walked to Jem and Scout’s house.
	Jem knew he was lying so Dill said that really he had taken $13 from his mother’s purse and took a train from Meridian to somewhere near Maycomb.  He had walked ten or eleven miles toward Maycomb and then rode the rest of the way, clinging to the back of a wagon.  Jem said that Dill’s folks and aunt would be worried about him, so they should tell Atticus.
	When Atticus came in the room, Dill said, “Mr. Finch, don’t tell Aunt Rachel, don’t make me go back, PLEASE sir!  I’ll run off again --! 
	Atticus said, “Whoa, son.  Nobody’s about to make you go anywhere but to bed pretty soon.  I’m just going over to tell Miss Rachel you’re here and ask her if you could spend the night with us – you’d like that , wouldn’t you?  And for goodness sake put some of the county back where it belongs, you’ve got so much dirt on you!!”
	Later that night I went to talk to Dill.  I asked him why he ran away.  He said that his parents weren’t really mean to him, it’s just that they weren’t interested in him.  They were always out, or if they were home they would be by themselves, not playing with him.  Dill said, “They ain’t mean.  They buy me everything I want, but then they expect me to just go off by myself and play with the toys they bought.  Oh, they ain’t mean.  They kiss you and hug you good night and good mornin’ and good-bye and tell you they love you – Scout, let’s get us a baby.”
	“Where?”
	Dill said there was a man he had heard of who had a boat that he rowed across to a foggy island where all these babies were; you could order one –
	I interrupted him by saying, “That’s a lie.  Aunty said God drops ‘em down the chimney.  At least that’s what I think she said.”
	“Well that ain’t so,” said Dill.  “you get babies from each other.  But there’s this man, too – he has all these babies just waitin’ to wake up, he breathes life into ‘em.”
	As we were drifting off to sleelp I said, “Dill, why do you figure Boo Radley has never run away?”
	Dill sighed a long sigh and said, “Maybe he doesn’t have anywhere to run off to…”

 
Chapter 15

	It was decided that Dill would stay after much pleading.  We had a week of peace together.  I minded Aunty, Jem had outgrown the treehouse, and Dill had a plan of putting lemon drops leading from Boo’s house out in order to make Boo come out of his house.  There was a knock on the front door and it was Mr. Heck Tate.  Here were some men outside as well and wanted Atticus to come outside.  There were only two reasons why men in Maycomb stayed outside and that was because there was a death or to talk politics.  Atticus went outside and we pressed our faces to the window to see and hear what was going on.  We heard, “…movin’ him to the county jail tomorrow,” Mr. Tate was saying.  “I don’t look for any trouble, but I can’t guarantee there won’t be any…”
	“Don’t be foolish, Heck,” Atticus said.  “This is Maycomb.”
	“… said I was just uneasy.”
	There was more talk.  Mr. Link Deas wanted to know if there was a chance that the trial could be held in another town for safety reasons. Mr. Deas is nervous about a crowd coming together when they’re drunk and causing trouble for Tom.  He continued, “—don’t know why you touched it in the the first place.  You’ve got everything to lose from this, Atticus.  I mean everything.”
	“Do you really think so?   … Link, that boy might go to the chair, but he’s not going till the truth’s told.”  Atticus’s voice was even.  “And you know what the truth is.”
	There was a murmur from the group of men.  In the crowd there were merchants, in-town farmers, Dr. Reynolds, and Mr. Avery.  Jem yelled out nervously, “Atticus, the telephone’s ringing!”  Even though it wasn’t.  Atticus told him to answer the phone and it made everyone in the group laugh.
	When Atticus came in he went to his chair and picked up the paper to read.  I walked home with Dill and returned in time to overhear a conversation between Atticus and Aunty.  I found Jem in his bedroom.  “Have they been at it?”  I asked.
	“Sort of.  She won’t let him alone about Tom Robinson.  She almost said Atticus was disgracing the family. Scout… I’m scared.”
	“Scared ‘a what?”
	“Scared about Atticus.  Somebody might hurt him.”
	
	The next day was Sunday and Tom Robinson had just been moved to the Maycomb jail.  The Sunday was quiet.  Atticus went to his office, Aunt Alexandra went for a two hour nap, and Jem in his old age went to his room with a stack of football magazines.  So Dill and I went out to the pasture to kick around the football.
	After supper, Atticus did something that interested us.  He came into the living room carrying a long extension cord.  There was a light bulb at the end.
	I’m going out for a while,” he said. “You folks’ll be in bed when I come back, so I’ll say good night now.”
	He put on his hat and went out the back door.  We noticed that he took the car.  One of our father’s peculiarities was that he liked to walk so taking the car was peculiar.
	Later on I said good night to Aunty and while I was in my room I heard Jem rattling around in his room.  I went in and asked him what he was doing.
	I’m goin’ downtown for a while.”  He was changing his pants.
	“Why it’s almost ten o’clock, Jem.  I’m goin’ with you.  If you say no you’re not, I’m goin’ anyway, hear?”
	I dressed quickly and Jem gave in with little grace.  I said that Dill would probably want to come so we stopped at Dill’s window at Miss Rachel’s.  “What’s up?”  Dill said.
	“Jem’s got the look-arounds.”
	“I’ve just got this feeling,” Jem said, “just this feeling.”
	We looked at Atticus’s office but it was dark inside.  We decided to go up the street thinking he was visiting with Mr. Underwood, editor and writer of The Maycomb Tribune.  He not only ran the newspaper, he lived about the office.  On the way to the newspaper office we would have to go past the jail.  There sitting in front of the jail was Atticus with the light and extension cord.  I was going to run to him but Jem stopped me.  He said that Atticus would not like us being here.  We were turning to leave and saw four cars moving slowly in line stop in front of the jail.  Atticus seemed to have been expecting them.
	In ones and twos, men got out of the cars.  Atticus remained where he was.  The men hid from view.
	“He in there, Mr. Finch?” a man said.
	“He is,” we heard Atticus answer,  “and he’s asleep.  Don’t wake him up.”
	The men talked in near-whispers.
	“You know what we want,” another man said.  “Get aside from the door, Mr. Finch.”
	“You can turn around and go home again, Walter,” Atticus said pleasantly.  “Heck Tate’s around somewhere.”
	“The hell he is,” said another man.  “Heck’s bunch’s so deep in the woods they won’t get out till mornin’.”
	“Indeed?  Why do?”
	“Called ’em off on a snipe hunt,” was the succinct answer.  “Didn’t you think a’ that, Mr. Finch?”
	“Thought about it, but didn’t believe it.  Well then,” my father’s voice was still the same, “that changes things, doesn’t it?”
	“It do,” another deep voice said.  Its owner was a shadow.
	“Do you really think so?”
	I broke away from Jem and ran to Atticus as fast as I could.  I pushed my way through the dark smelly bodies and burst into the circle of light.
	“H’ey Atticus!”
	A flash of plain fear was in his eyes and Jem and Dill wriggled into the light too.  There was a smell of stale whiskey and pigpen.  I looked around and did not notice these men.  These men were not the same men as the other night.  Atticus got up from his chair.
	“Go home, Jem,” he said.  “Take Scout and Dill home.”
	The way Jem was standing he was not thinking of budging.
	“Go home, I said.”
	Jem shook his head.
	“Son, I said go home.”
	Jem shook his head agin.
	“I’ll send him home,” a burly man said, and grabbed Jem roughly by the collar.  He yanked Jem nearly off his feet.
	“Don’t you touch him!”  I kicked the man swiftly.  I was surprised to see him fall back in real pain.  I intended to kick his shin, but aimed too high.
	Atticus told me that will do and said that I shouldn’t kick folks.
	“All right, Mr. Finch, get ‘em outta here,” someone growled.  “You got fifteen seconds to get ‘em outta here.”
	I looked around and saw that most of the men were dressed in overalls and denim shirts buttoned up to the collars even though it was a summer’s night.  I sought once more for a familiar face.  I found one.
	“Hey, Mr. Cunningham.”
	The man did not hear me, it seemed.
	“Hey, Mr. Cuningham.  How’s your entailment getting’ along?”
	Mr. Walter Cunningham’s legal affairs were well known to me since Atticus had once described them to me at length.  The big man blinked at me and hooked his thumbs in his overall straps.  He looked away.  My friendly overture had fallen flat.
	“Don’t you remember me, Mrs. Cunningham? I’m Jean Louise Finch.  You brought us some hickory nuts one time, remember?”  I began to sense the futility one feels when unacknowledged by a chance acquaintance.
	“I go to school with Walter,” I began again.  “He’s your boy, ain’t he?  Ain’t he sir?”
	Mr. Cunningham was moved to a faint nod.  He did know me after all.
	“He’s in my grade,” I said, “and he does right well.  He’s a good boy,” I added, “a real nice boy.  We brought him home for dinner one time.  Maybe he told you about me, I beat him up one time but he was real nice about it.  Tell him hey for me, won’t you?”
	Atticus had always told me to be polite and to talk to people about things they were interested in.  The men were all looking at me.  I wondered what idiocy I had committed.  I began to feel sweat gathering at the edges of my hair.
	“What’s the matter?”  I asked.
	Mr. Cunningham did a peculiar thing.  He squatted down and took me by both shoulders.
	“I’ll tell him you said hey, little lady,” he said.
	Then he straightened up and waved a big paw.  “Let’s clear out,” he called.  “Let’s get going, boys.”
	The men shuffled back into their cars and were gone.
	I turned to Atticus.  “Can we go home now?”  He nodded.
	“Mr. Finch?  They gone?”
	“They’ve gone,” he said.  “Get some sleep, Tom.  They won’t bother you anymore.”
	From a different direction, another voice cut crisply through the night:  “You’re damn tootin’ they won’t.  Had you covered all the time, Atticus.”
	Mr. Underwood and a double-barrelled shotgun were leaning out the window.  We started to walk home.  Atticus and Jem were ahead of me and Dill.  I thought Atticus would give Jem hell for not going home, but I was wrong.  Atticus reached out and massaged Jem’s hair, his one gesture of affection. 

 
Chapter 16

	Atticus drove us home and killed the engine as we approached the house so we wouldn’t wake Aunty.  We went to our rooms without a word.  I was very tired.  I was drifting to sleep when the events of the night hit me and I started crying.  Jem came to me and he was awfully nice to me.
	In the morning, Aunty, who knew about what happened last night, said that children who slipped out at night were a disgrace to the family.  Aunty also said that Mr. Underwood was there the whole time and nothing bad would have happened.
	“You know, it’s a funny thing about Braxton (Mr. Underwood),” said Atticus.  “He despises Negroes, won’t have one near him.”
	Aunty took offense to Atticus saying this comment about Mr. Underwood in front of Calpurnia.  “Don’t talk like that in front of them.”
	“Talk like what in front of whom?” he asked.
	“Like that in front of Calpurnia.  You said Braxton Underwood despises Negroes right in front of her.”
	“Well, I’m sure Cal knows it.  Everybody in Maycomb knows it.  Anything fit to say at the table’s fine to say in front of Calpurnia.  She knows what she means to this family.”
	“I don’t think it’s a good habit, Atticus.  It encourages them.  You know how they talk among themselves.  Everything that happens in this town’s out to the Quarters before sundown.”
	“I don’t know of any law that says they can’t talk.  Maybe if we didn’t give them so much to talk about they’d be quiet.”
	I was playing with my spoon and asked, “I thought Mr. Cunningham was  a friend of ours.  You told me a long time ago he was.”
	“He still is.”
	“But last night he wanted to hurt you.”
	“Mr. Cunningham’s basically a good man,” he said.  “He just has his blind spots along with the rest of us.”
	Jem spoke.  “Don’t call that a blind spot.  He’d a’ killed you last night when he first went there.”
	“He might have hurt me a little,” Atticus conceded, “but son, you’ll understand folks a little better when you’re older.  A mob’s always made up of people, no matter what.  Mr. Cunningham was part of a mob last night, but he was still a man.  Every mob in every little Southern town is always made up of people, you know – doesn’t say much for them, does it?”
	“I’ll say not,” said Jem.
	“So it took an eight-year-old child to bring ‘em to their senses, didn’t it?” said Atticus.  “That proves something --- that a gang of wild animals can be stopped, simply because they’re still human.  Hmph, maybe we need a police force of children… you children last night made Walter Cunningham stand in my shoes for a minute.  That was enough.”
	Dill came by and said that it’s all over town how we held off a hundred people with our bare hands.  Aunt Alexandra said it was nowhere near a hundred people and that it was just a bunch of drunk and disorderly men.
	Miss Maudie was out in her yard.  Jem yelled over, “You goin’ to court this morning?”
	“I am not,” she said.  “I have no business with the court this morning.”
	“Aren’t you goin’ down to watch?” asked Dill.
	“I am not.  It’s morbid, watching a poor devil on trial for his life.  Look at all those folks, it’s like a Roman carnival.”
	The courthouse square was covered with picnic parties sitting on newspapers, washing down biscuits and syrup with warm milk from fruit jars.
	In the far corner of the square, the Negroes sat quietly in the sun, dining on sardines, crackers, and the more vivid flavors of Nehi Cola.  Mr. Dophus Raymond sat with them.
	“Jem,” said Dill.  “He’s drinkin’ out of a sack.”
	Mr. Dolphus Raymond was drinking something out of a paper sack with two straws.
	Jem giggled, “He’s got a Co-Cola bottle full of whiskey in there.  That’s son’s not to upset the ladies.  You’ll see him sip it all afternoon, he’ll step out for a while and fill it back up.”
	Why’s he sittin’ with the colored folks?”
	“Always does.  He likes ‘em better’n he likes us, I reckon.  Lives by himself way down near the county line.  He’s got a colored woman and all sorts of mixed chillun.  Show you some of ‘em if we see ‘em.”
	“He doesn’t look like trash,” said Dill.
	“He’s not, he owns all one side of the riverbank down there, and he’s from a real old family to boot.”
	“Then why does he do like that?”
	“That’s just his way,” said Jem.  “They say he never got over his weddin’.  He was supposed to marry one of the – the Spencer ladies, I think.  They were gonna have a huge weddin’, but they didn’t – after the rehearsal the bride went upstairs and blew her head off.  Shotgun.  She pulled the trigger with her toes.”
	“Did they ever know why?”
	“No,” said Jem.  “Nobody ever knew quite why but Mr. Dolphus.  They said it was because she found out about his colored woman, he reckoned he could keep her and get married too.  He’s been sorta drunk ever since.  You know, thought, he’s real good to those chillun—“
	“Jem,” I asked.  “What’s a mixed child?”
	“Half white, half colored.  You’ve seen ‘em, Scout.  You know that red kinky-headed one that delivers for the drugstore.  He’s half white.  They’re real sad.”
	“Sad, how come?”
	“They don’t belong anywhere.  Colored folks won’t have ‘em because they’re half white; white folks won’t have ‘em because they’re colored, so they’re just in-between, don’t belong anywhere.  But Mr. Dolphus, now, they say he’s shipped two of his up North.  They don’t mind ‘em up North.  Yonder’s one of ‘em.”
	Jem told us, “Around here once you have a drop of Negro blood, that makes you all black.”
	“Let’s go in,” said Dill.
	“Naw, we better wait till they get in.  Atticus might not like it if he sees us,” said Jem.
	We knew there would be a crowd but we had not bargained for the multitudes of people.  We overheard conversations about my father.
	“…thinks he knows what he’s doing,” one said.
	“Ohh now, I wouldn’t say that,” another said.
	“Lemme tell you somethin’ now, Billy,” a third said, “you know the court appointed him to defend this n****r.”
	“Yeah, but Atticus aims to defend him.  That’s what I don’t like about it.”
	The Negroes waited for the white people to go in and then they climbed to the balcony where they were to sit.  We couldn’t find a seat anywhere and were going to have to stand by the wall.  We ran into Reverend Sykes.  He edged his way and told us that there was not a seat anywhere downstairs.
	“Do you all reckon it’ll be all right if you all come to the balcony with me?”
	“Gosh, yes, “ said Jem.  Happily we sped ahead of Reverend Sykes to the staircase.  Four Negroes rose and gave us their front-row seats.
	The jury sat on the left, under long windows.  One or two of the jury looked vaguely like dressed up Cunninghams.  Atticus and Tom Robinson sat at tables with their backs to us and there was the prosecutor at the other table.  Judge Taylor was at the bench.
	Judge Taylor looked like he was sleepy but knew the law and actually ran his courtroom with a firm grip.  He had one peculiar habit.  He allowed smoking in his courtroom but didn’t smoke himself.  However, he did, at times, put a long dry cigar into his mouth and munch it up slowly.  Bit by bit the dead cigar would disappear, to reappear some hours later as a flat slick mess, its essence extracted and mingled with Judge Taylor’s digestive juices.  I once asked Atticus how Mrs. Taylor stood to kiss him, but Atticus said they didn’t kiss much.  By the time we took our seats in the balcony, Sheriff Heck Tate was already taking his seat on the witness stand.

 
Chapter 17

	I asked if those were the Ewells sitting down there, but Jem told me to hush since Heck Tate was testifying.
	I saw that Heck Tate had worn a normal suit and looked like every other man.
	The solicitor was named Mr. Gilmer and he was not well known to us.  He was from Abbottsville and we only saw him when there was a trial.  He was anywhere between forty and sixty.  We knew that he had a slight cast in one of his eyes which he used to his advantage.  He seemed to be looking at a person when he was actually doing notheing of the kind, thus he was hell on juries and witnesses.  They thought they were under close scrutiny so they paid attention but so did the witnesses.
	Mr. Gilmer was asking questions about what happened on the night he was called to the Ewell’s house.
	Mr. Tate said, “I was fetched by Bob—Mr. Bob Ewell yonder, one night –“
	“What night, sir?”
	Mr. Tate said, “It was the night of November twenty-first.  I was just leaving my office to go home when Bob – Mr. Ewell came in, very excited he was, and said to get out to his house quick, some n****r’d raped his girl.”
	“Did you go?”
	“Certainly.  Got in the car and went out as fast as I could.”
	“And what did you find?”
	“Found her lying on the floor in the middle of the front room, one on the right as you go in.  She was pretty well beat up, but I heaved her to her feet and she washed her face in a bucket in the corner and said she was all right.  I asked her who hurt her and she said it was Tom Robinson –“
	Judge Taylor thought that Atticus was going to object but he didn’t.
	“-- asked her if he beat her like that, she said yes he head.  Asked her if he took advantage of her and she said yes, he did.  So I went down to Robinson’s house and brought him back.  She identified him as the one, so I took him in.  That’s all there was to it.”
	“Thank you,” said Mr. Gilmer.
	Judge Taylor asked if Atticus had any questions and he did.
	“Did you call a doctor, Sheriff?  Did anybody call a doctor?” asked Atticus.
	“No, sir,” said Mr. Tate.
	“Why not?”  There was an edge to Atticus’s voice.
	“Well I can tell you why I didn’t.  It wasn’t necessary, Mr. Finch.  She was mighty banged up.  Something sho’ happened, it was obvious.”	
	“But you didn’t call a doctor?  While you were there did anyone send for one, fetch one, carry her to one?”
	“No sir –“
	Judge Taylor told Atticus that he had already answered the questions and to move on.  Atticus wanted to make sure.
	“Sheriff,” Atticus was saying, “you say she was mighty banged up.  In what way?”
	“Well –“
	“Just describe the injuries, Heck.”
	“Well, she was beaten around the head.  There was already bruises comin’ on her arms, and it happened about thirty minutes before—“
	“How do you know?”
	Mr. Tate grinned.  “Sorry, that’s what they said.  Anyway, she was pretty bruised up when I got there, and she had a black eye comin’.”
	“Which eye?”
	“Let’s see,” he said softly, then he looked at Atticus as if he considered the question childish.  “Can’t you remember?”  Atticus asked.
	Mr.. Tate pointed to an invisible person five inches in front of him and said, “Her left.”
	“Wait a minute, Sheriff,” said Atticus.  “Was it her left facing you or her left looking the same way you were?”
	
	Mr. Tate said, “Oh yes, that’d make it her right.  It was her right eye, Mr. Finch.  I remember now, she was bunged up on that side of her face…”
	Mr. Tate blinked as if something had suddenly been made clear to him.  He turned and looked at Tom Robinson and Tom raised his head also.
	Something became clear to Atticus as well and he asked the sheriff to repeat what he just said.
	“It was her right eye, I said.”
	Attticus looked up at Mr. Tate.  Which side again, Heck?”
	“The right side, Mr. Finch, but she had more bruises – you wanta hear about ‘em?”
	“Yes, what were her other injuries?”
	“… her arms were bruised, and she showed me her neck.  There were definite finger marks on her gullet—“
	“All around her throat?  At the back of her neck?”
	“I’d say they were all around Mr. Finch.”
	“You would?”
	“Yes sir, she had a small throat, anybody could’a reached around it with—“
	“Just answer the question yes or no please, Sheriff,”, said Atticus dryly, and Mr. Tate fell silent.  
	They were all finished with Mr. Tate as a witness and he stepped down from the witness stand.
	Everyone shuffled around a bit, whispering to each other.  Dill asked Reverend Sykes what that was all about, but he didn’t know.  So far things were utterly dull.  There were no arguments from opposing counsel and there was no drama.  All were relaxed except Jem.
	“Robert E. Lee Ewell!”
	In answer to the clerk’s booming voice, a man rose and strutted to the stand, the back of his neck reddening at the sound of his name.  When he turned around to take the stand we say that he had wispy hair that stood up from his forehead, a nose that was thin and pointed, and no chin to speak of.
	Every town had families like the Ewells.  They lived off of welfare, no truant officer could get the children in school, and no health official could free them from diseases that came from their filthy surroundings.
	The Ewells lived behind the town garbage dump in what was once a Negro cabin.  It’s a square shaped cabin with four small rooms.  Its windows were just open spaces in the walls that were covered with greasy cheesecloth in the summer to keep out the varmints.  Their yard was dirty and contained the remains of a Model-T Ford, a discarded dentist’s chair, an ancient icebox, plus lesser items:  old shoes, worn-out table radios, picture frames, and fruit jars.
	One corner of the yard, though, bewildered Maycomb.  Against the fence, in a line, were six chipped-enamel slop jars holding brilliant red geraniums, cared for as tenderly as if they belonged to Miss Maudie Atkinson.  People said they were Mayella Ewell’s.
	Nobody was quite sure how many children were on the place.  Some people thought there were six, others said nine.  There were always several dirty faced ones at the windows when anyone passed.
	“Mr. Robert Ewelll?” asked Mr. Gilmer.
	“That’s m’name, Cap’n,” said the witness.
	Mr. Gilmer’s back stiffened.  “Are you the father of Mayelle Ewell?” was the next question. 
	“Well, if I ain’t I can’t do nothing about it now, her ma’s dead,” was the answer.
	Judge Taylor spoke up in a way that made all the laughter in the courtroom die down, “Are you the Father of Mayella Ewell?”
	“Yes sir,” Mr. Ewell said meekly.
	Judge Taylor spoke again and informed Mr. Ewell that he will no longer take any obscene speculations on any subject from anybody in this courtroom.
	Mr. Gilmer continued, “Thank you, sir.  Mr. Ewell, would you tell us in your own words what happened on the evening of November 21st, please?”
	“Well, the night of November twenty-one I was comin’ in from the woods with a load o’ kindlin’ and just as I got to the fence I heard Mayella screamin’ like a stuck hog inside the 
house-–“
	“What time was it, Mr. Ewell?”
	“Just ‘fore sundown.  Well, I was sayin’ Mayella was screamin’ fit to beat Jesus—“ another glance from the bench silenced Mr. Ewell.
	“Yes? She was screaming?” said Mr. Gilmer.
	“Well, Mayella was raisin’ this holy racket so I dropped m’load and run as fast as I could but I run into th’ fence, but when I got distangled I run up to th’ window and I seen—“ Mr. Ewell’s face grew scarlet.  He stood up and pointed his finger at Tom Robinson.  “I seen that black n****r yonder ruttin’ on my Mayella!”
	Judge Taylor used his gavel for five full minutes before the courtroom came to order.
Reverend Sykes leaned across Dill and told Jem that he ought to take me home.
	Jem turned his head.  “Scout, go home.  Dill, you’n Scout go home.”
	“You gotta make me first,” I said, remembering Atticus’s promise.
	“I think it’s okay, Reverend, she doesn’t understand it.”
	I was offended. “I most certainly do, I c’n understand anything you can.”
	Reverend Sykes got nervous.  “Mr. Finch know you all are here?  This ain’t fit for Miss Jean Louise or you boys either.”
	Jem shook his head.  “He can’t see us this far away.  It’s alright, Reverend.”
	Jem won.  He got us to stay.
	Judge Taylor finally got the courtroom back under control and Bob Ewell looked mighty pleased at what he had caused.  Judge Taylor threatened to clear all the spectators out of the courtroom if there were more outbursts.
	“Proceed Mr. Gilmer.”  Judge Taylor stated.
	“Mr. Ewell, did you see the defendant having sexual intercourse with your daughter?”
	“Yes, I did.”
	“You say you were at the window?” asked Mr. Gilmer.
	“Yes, sir.”
	“How far is it from the ground?”
	“’Bout three foot.”
	“Did you have a clear view?”
	“Yes, sir.”
	“How did the room look?”
	“Well, it was all slung about, like there was a fight.”
	“What did you do when you saw the defendant?”
	“Well, I run around the house to get in, but he ran out the front door just ahead of me.  I sawed who he was, all right.  I was too distracted about Mayella to run after ‘im.  I run in the house and she was lyin’ on the floor squallin’—“
	“Then what did you do?”
	“Why I run for Tate quick as I could.  I knowed who it was, all right, lived down yonder in that n****r-nest, passed the house every day.  Jedge, I’ve asked this county for fifteen years to clean out that nest down yonder, they’re dangerous to live around ‘sides devaluin’ my prop-erty—“
	“Thank you, Mr. Ewell,” said Mr. Gilmer hurriedly.
	Bob Ewell made a hasty retreat form the witness stand, but Atticus had also risen to ask a few questions. Mr. Ewell backed up to the witness stand and the crowd laughed at him.
	“Mr. Ewell,” Atticus began, “folks were doing a lot of running that night.  Let’s see, you say you ran to the house, you ran to the window, you ran inside, you ran to Mayella, you ran for Mr. Tate.  Did you, during all this running, run for a doctor?”
	“Wadn’t no need to.  I seen what happened.”
	“But there’s one thing I don’t understand,” said Atticus.  “Weren’t you concerned with Mayella’s condition?”
	“I most positively was,” said Mr. Ewell.  “I seen who done it.”
	“No, I mean her physical condition.  Did you not think the nature of her injuries warranted immediate medical attention?”
	“What?”
	“Didn’t you think she should have had a doctor, immediately?”
	Mr. Ewell in all of his life would never have thought to call on a doctor.  It would have cost him five dollars.
	Atticus asked him if he heard Mr. Heck Tate’s testimony and he said that he did.
	Atticus asked, “Do you agree with his description of Mayella’s injuries?”
	“How’s that?”
	“Mr. Tate testified that her right eye was blackened, that she was beaten around the –“
	“Oh yeah,” said the witness.  “I hold with everything Tate said.”
	“You do?  I just want to make sure… ‘Which eye her left? Oh yes that’d make it her right, it was her right eye…’ ”
	“I holds with Tate.  Her eye was blacked and she was mighty beat up.”  Mr. Ewell answered.
	“Mr. Ewell, can you read and write?”
	“I most positively can.”
	“Will you write your name and show us?”
	“I most positively will.  How do you think I sign my relief checks?”
	Mr. Ewell wrote his name.
	“What’s so interestin’?” he asked.
	“You’re left-handed, Mr. Ewell,” said Judge Taylor.  Mr. Ewell got angry and didn’t see what being left-handed had to do with it.
	Mr. Gilmer asked him one more question.  “About your writing with your left hand… are you ambidextrous, Mr. Ewell?”
	“I most positively am not, I can use one hand good as the other.  One hand good as the other,” he added, glaring at the defense table.
	Jem got excited, “We’ve got him.”
	I didn’t think so.  I knew Atticus was trying to show that since Mayella was mostly beaten on her right side, it had to be a left-handed person who did it.  But Tom Robinson could easily be left-handed too.

 
Chapter 18

	The booming voice for the clerk range out, “Mayella Violet Ewell!”
	A young girl walked to the witness stand and raised her hand to be sworn in as a witness.  She was a thick-bodied girl who was accustomed to strenuous labor.
	It was also clear that Mayella tried to keep clean and I was reminded of the red geraniums in the Ewell yard.
	Mr. Gilmer asked Mayella to tell the jury in her own words what happened on the evening of November twenty-first of last year.
	Mayella sat silently.
	“Where were you at dusk on that evening” began Mr. Gilmer patiently.
	“On the porch.”
	“Which porch?”
	“Ain’t but one, the front porch.”
	“What were you doing on the porch?”
	“Nothin’.”
	Judge Taylor said, “Just tell us what happened.  You can do that, can’t you?”
	Mayella stared at him and then burst into tears.  Judge Taylor let her cry for a bit and then said, “That’s enough now.  Don’t be ‘fraid of anybody here, as long as you tell the truth.  All this is strange to you, I know, but you’ve nothing to be ashamed of and nothing to fear.  What are you scared of?”
	Mayella said something behind her hands and the judge had to ask her to repeat.
	“Him,” she sobbed, pointing to Atticus.
	“Mr. Finch?”
	She nodded saying, “Don’t want him doin’ me like he done Papa, tryin’ to make him out lefthanded…”		
	Judge Taylor looked at a loss as to what to.  He asked, “How old are you?
	“Nineteen-and-a-half,” Mayella said.
	The judge spoke in soothing tones.  “Mr. Finch has no idea of scaring you: he growled, “and if he did, I’m here to stop him.  That’s one thing I’m sitting up here for.  Now you’re a big girl, so you just sit up straight and tell the – tell us what happened to you.  You can do that, can’t you?
	Up in the balcony, I wondered if she had good sense.
	Mayella answered Mr. Gilmer’s question.  “Well sir, I was on the porch and – an dhe came along and, you see, there was this old chiffarobe in the yard Papa’d brought to chop up for kindlin’ – Papa told me to do it while he was off in the woods but I wadn’t feelin’ strong enough then, so he came by –“
	“Who is ‘he’?”
	Mayella pointed to Tom Robinson.
	“Then what happened?”
	“I said, ‘Come here, n****r, and bust up this chiffarobe for me.’  I gotta nickel and I turned around and ‘fore I knew it he was on me.  Just run up behind me, he did.  He got me round the neck cussin’ me an’ sayin’ dirt – I fought n’ hollered, but he had me round the neck.  He hit me agin an’ agin –“
	Mr. Gilmer waited for Mayella to get ahold of herself.  She then waited for Mr. Gilmer to ask another question and when he didn’t she said, “He chunked me on the floor an’ choked me  n’ took advantage of me.”
	“Did you scream?” asked Mr. Gilmer “Did you scream and fight back?”
	“Reckon I did, hollered for all I was worth, kicked and hollered loud as I could.”
	“Then what happened?”
	“I don’t remember too good, but next thing I knew Papa was in the room a’standing over me hollerin’, ‘Who done it, who done it?’ Then I sorta fainted an’ the next thing I knew Mr. Tate was pullin’ me up offa the floor and leadin’ me to the water bucket.”
	“You say you fought him off as hard as you could?  Fought him tooth and nail?” asked Mr. Gilmer
	“I positively did,” Mayella echoed her father.
	“You are positive that he took full advantage of you?”
	Mayella’s face scrunched up and I thought she was going to cry again but didn’t and said, “He done what he was after.”
	Mr. Gilmer was finished and Atticus got up to ask some questions of Mayella.
	“Miss Mayella,” he said, smiling.  “I won’t try to scare you for a while, not yet.  Let’s just get acquainted.  How old are you?”
	“Said I was nineteen, said it to the judge yonder.”
	“So you did, so you did, ma’am.  You’ll have to bear with me, Miss Mayella, I’m getting along and can’t remember as well as I used to.  I might ask you a thing you’ve already said before, but you’ll give me an answer, won’t you? Good.”
	She didn’t look like Atticus had gotten her full cooperation.  She was looking at him like she was mad as hell.
	“Won’t answer a word you say long as you keep on mockin’ me,” she said.
	“Ma’am?” asked Atticus, startled.
	“Long’s you keep on makin’ fun o’ me.”
	Judge Taylor said, “Mr. Finch is not making fun of you.  What’s the matter with you?”
	Mayella said to the judge, “Long’s he keeps on callin’ me ma’am and sayin’ Miss Mayella.  I don’t hafta take his sass, I ain’t called upon to take it.”
	The judge tried to explain.  “That’s just Mr. Finch’s way.  We’ve done business in court for years, and Mr. Finch is always courteous to everybody.  He’s not trying to mock you, he’s trying to be polite.  That’s just his way.  Atticus, let’s get on with these proceedings, and let the record show that the witness has not been sassed, her views to the contrary.”
	I wondered if anybody had ever called Mayella “ma’am” or “Miss Mayella”; probably not.  She probably took offense to routine courtesy.  I wondered what her life had been like.
	“You say you’re nineteen,” Atticus resumed.  “How many sisters and brothers have you?”
	“Seb’m” she said.
	“You the eldest? The oldest?”
	“Yes.”
	“How long has your mother been dead?”
	“Don’t know – long time.”
	“Did you ever go to school?”
	“Read n’ write good as Papa yonder.”
	“How long did you go to school?”
	“Two year… three year… dunno.”
	These questions were to give the jury a picture of the Ewell’s home life, I realized.  The jury learned that the welfare check was not enough to feed the family, Papa went off into the swamp for days and came home sick, you could make shoes out of strips of tires and that the family carries water in buckets from a spring to their house.
	“Miss Mayella,” said Atticus, “a nineteen-year-old girl like you must have friends.  Who are your friends?”
	The witness looked puzzled.  “Friends?”
	“Yes, don’t you know anyone near your age, or older or younger?  Boys and girls?  Just ordinary friends?”
	“You makin’ fun o’ me agin, Mr. Finch?”
	“Do you love your father, Miss Mayella?” was his next question.
	“Love him, whatcha mean?”
	“I mean, is he good to you, is he easy to get along with?”
	“He does tollable, ‘cept when –“
	“Except when?”
	Mayella looked at her father and he sat up straight and waited for her to answer.
	“Except when nothin’,” said Mayella.  “I said he does tollable.”
	Mr. Ewell leaned back in his chair again.
	“Except when he’s drinking?” asked Atticus so gently that Mayella nodded. “Does he ever go after you?”
	“How do you mean?”
	“When he’s – riled, has he ever beaten you?”
	Mayella looked at the court reporter.  Judge Taylor told her to answer the question.
	“My paw’s never touched a hair o’ my head in my life,” she declared firmly.  “He never touched me.”
	“We’ve had a good visit, Miss Mayella, and now I guess we’d better get to the case.  You say you asked Tom Robinson to come chop up a – what was it?”
	“A chiffarobe, a old dresser full of drawers on one side.”
	“Was Tom Robinson well known to you?”
	“Whaddya mean?”
	“I mean did you know who he was, where he lived?”
	Mayella nodded.  “I knowed who he was, he passed the house every day.”
	“Was this the first time you asked him to come inside the fence?”
	She didn’t answer the questions right away so Atticus started to ask it again, but she answered, “Yes, it was.”
	“Didn’t you ever ask him to come inside the fence before?”
	She was prepared now for this question.  “I did not, I certainly did not.”
	“One did not’s enough,” said Atticus serenely.  “You never asked him to do odd jobs for you before?”
	“I mighta,” conceded Mayella.  “There was several n****s  around.”
	“Can you remember any other occasions?”
	“No.”
	“All right, now to what happened.  You said Tom Robinson was behind you in the room when you turned around, that right?”
	“Yes.”
	“You said he ‘got you around the neck cussin and saying dirt’ – is that right?”
	“’t’s right.”
	“You say ‘he caught me and choked me and took advantage of me’ – is that right?”
	“That’s what I said”
	“Do you remember him beating you about the face?”
	Mayella was silent.  She seemed to be trying to get something clear to herself.
	“It’s an easy question, Miss Mayella, so I’ll try again.  Do you remember him beating you about the face?”  Atticus was speaking in a professional voice.  “Do you remember him beating you about the face?”
	“No, I don’t recollect if he hit me.  I mean, yes I do, he hit me.”
	“Was your last sentence your answer?”
	“Huh?  Yes, he hit – I just don’t remember, I just don’t remember… it all happened so quick.”
	Judge Taylor told her not to cry again but Atticus said to let her cry all she wants.  They’ve all the time in the world.
	“I’ll answer any question you got --- get me up here an’ mock me, will you?  I’ll answer any question you got—“
	“That’s fine,” said Atticus.  “There’re only a few more.  Miss Mayella, not to be tedious, you’ve testified that the defendant hit you, grabbed you around the neck, choked, you, and took advantage of you.  I want you to be sure you have the right man.  Will you identify the man who raped you?”
	“I will, that’s him right yonder.”
	Atticus turned to Tom and said, “Tom, stand up.  Let Miss Mayella have a good long look at you.  Is this the man, Miss Mayella?”
	Tom Robinson stood up.  Strong powerful shoulder muscles showed under his thin shirt.  He looked off balance though.  His left arm was fully twelve inches shorter than his right, and hung dead at his side.  It ended in a small shriveled hand, and from as far away as the balcony I could see that it was no use to him.
	“Scout,” breathed Jem.  “Scout look!  Reverend, he’s crippled!”
	Reverend Sykes explained to us that Tom got his arm caught in Mr. Dolphus Raymond’s cotton gin when he was a boy.  He almost bled to death and the machine had tore the muscles loose from his bones.
	“Is this the man who raped you?” asked Atticus.
	“It most certainly is.”
	“How?”
	Mayella was raging.  “I don’t know how he done it, but he done it – I said it all happened so fast I—“
	“Now let’s consider this calmly—“ began Atticus. “…Miss Mayella, you’ve testified that the defendant choked and beat you – you didn’t say that he sneaked up behind you and knocked you out cold, but you turned around and there he was – do you wish to reconsider any of your testimony?”
	“You want me to say something that didn’t happen?”
	“No ma’am, I want you to say something that did happen.  Tell us once more, please, what happened?”
	“I told’ja what happened.”
	“You testified that you turned around and there he was.  He choked you then?”
	“Yes.”
	“Then he released your throat and hit you?”
	“I said he did.”
	“He blacked your left eye with his right fist?”
	“I ducked and it – it glanced, that’s what it did.  I ducked and it glanced off.”  Mayella had finally seen the light.
	“You’re becoming suddenly clear on this point.  A while ago you couldn’t remember too well, could you?”
	“I said he hit me.”
	“All right.  He choked you, he hit you, then he raped you, that right?”
	“It most certainly is.”
	“You’re a strong girl, what were you doing all the time, just standing there?”
	“I told’ja I hollered n’ kicked n’ fought—“
	“All right, why didn’t you run?”
	“I tried…”
	“Tried to?  What kept you from it?”
	“I—he slung me down.  That’s what he did, he slung me down n’ got on top of me.”
	“You were screaming all this time?”
	“I certainly was.”
	“Then why didn’t the other children hear you?  Where were they?  At the dump? Where were they?”
	No answer.
	“Why didn’t your screams make them come running?  The dump’s closer than the woods, isn’t it?”
	No answer.
	“Or didn’t you scream until you saw your father in the window?  You didn’t think to scream until then, did you?”
	No answer.
	“Did you scream first at your father instead of at Tom Robinson?  Was that it?
	No answer.
	“Who beat you up?  Tom Robinson or your father?”
	No answer.
	“What did your father see in the window, the crime of rape or the best defense to it?  Why don’t you tell the truth child, didn’t Bob Ewell beat you up?”
	Suddenly Mayella became articulate.  “I got somethin’ to say,” she said.
	“Do you want to tell us what happened?”  Atticus said compassionately.
	“I got somethin’ to say an’ then I ain’t gonna say no more.  That n****r yonder took advantage of me an’ if you fine fancy gentlemen don’t wanta do nothin’ about it then you’re all yellow stinkin’ cowards, stinkin’ cowards, the lot of you.  Your fancy airs don’t come to nothin’ – your ma’amin’ and Miss Mayellerin’ don’t come to nothin’, Mr. Finch –“
	Then she burst into real tears.  She answered no more questions.  I guess if she hadn’t been so poor and ignorant, Judge Taylor would have put her in jail for not answering anymore questions.
	Mr. Gilmer told the judge that the state was through with their case.  Judge Taylor said that everyone could take a ten minute break.
	Atticus and Mr. Gilmer met with the judge behind closed doors.  We all got up and stretched.  The temperature was about 90 degrees and we were all very hot.
	Mr. Underwood was getting information for the newspaper.  He looked around and saw us up in the balcony.
	“Jem,” I said, “Mr. Underwood’s seen us.”
	“That’s okay.  He won’t tell Atticus, he’ll just put it on the social side of the Tribune.”
	Judge Taylor returned and climbed into this chair.   “It’s gettin’ on to four,” he said, “Shall we try to wind up this afternoon? How ‘bout it, Atticus?”
	“I think we can,” said Atticus.
	“How many witnesses you got?”
	“One.”
	“Well, call him.”

 
Chapter 19

	Thomas Robinson lifted his bad arm to raise it on the Bible to give his oath.  It slipped off and the judge growled, “That’ll do, Tom.”
	Tom was twenty-five years old and he was married with three children.  We also found out that he had once been in trouble with the law.  He once received thirty days in jail for disorderly conduct.
	“It must have been disorderly,” said Atticus.  “What did it consist of?”
	“Got in a fight with another man, he tried to cut me.”
	“Did he succeed?”
	“Yes, suh, a little, not enough to hurt.  You see, I—“ Tom moved his left shoulder.
	“Yes,” said Atticus.  “You were both convicted?”
	“Yes suh, I had to serve ‘cause I couldn’t pay the fine.  Other fellow paid his ‘n.”
	“Were you acquainted with Mayella Violet Ewell?” asked Atticus.
	“Yes suh, I had to pass her place goin’ to and from the field every day.”
	“Whose field?”
“I picks for Mr. Link Deas.”
“Were you picking cotton in November?”
“No suh, I works in his yard fall an’ wintertime.  I works pretty steady for him all year round, he’s got a lot of pecan trees ‘n things.”
“You say you had to pass the Ewell place to get to and from work.  Is there any other way to go?”
“No, suh, none’s that I know of.”
“Tom, did she ever speak to you?”
“Why, yes suh, I’d tip m’ hat when I’d go by, and one day she asked me to come inside the fence and bust up a chiffarobe for her.”
“When did she ask you to chop up the—the chiffarobe?”
“Mr. Finch, it was way last spring.  I remember it because it was choppin’ time and I had my hoe with me.  I said I didn’t have nothin’ but this hoe, but she said she had a hatchet.  She give me the hatchet and I broke up the chiffarobe.  She said, ‘I reckon I’ll hafta give you a nickel, won’t I?’ an’ I said, ‘No ma’am there ain’t no charge.’  Then I went home.  Mr. Finch, that was way last spring, way over a year ago.”
“Did you ever go on the place again?”
“Yes, suh.”
“When?”
“Well, I went lots of times.”
There was murmuring in the courtroom but it died down quickly.
“Under what circumstances?”
“Please, suh?”
“Why did you go inside the fence lots of times?”
“She’d call me in, suh.  Seemed like every time I passed by yonder she’d have some little somethin’ for me to do—choppin’, kindlin’, totin’ water for her.  She watered them red flowers every day—“
“Were you paid for your services?”
“No suh, not after she offered me a nickel the first time.  I was glad to do it, Mr. Ewell didn’t seem to help her none, and neither did the chillun, and I knowed she didn’t have no nickels to spare.”
“Where were the other children?”
“They was always around, all over the place. They’d watch me work, some of ‘em’d set in the window.”
“Would Miss Mayella talk to you?”
“Yes sir, she talked to me.”
It came to me as Tom was testifying that Mayella must have been the loneliest person in the world.  She was even lonelier than Boo Radley who had not been out of the house in twenty-five years.  She didn’t understand when Atticus asked her if she had any friends.  She thought he was making fun of her.  She couldn’t be like Mr. Dolphus Raymond because she didn’t have a lot of money for people to overlook the fact that he lived with Negroes.  Tom Robinson was probably the only person who was ever decent to her.  But she said he took advantage of her and when she looked at him in court, she looked down upon him like he was dirt beneath her feet.
“Did you ever,” Atticus said, “at any time, go on the Ewell property—did you ever set foot on the Ewell property without an express invitation from one of them?”
“No suh, Mr. Finch, I never did.  I wouldn’t do that, suh.”
“Tom, what happened to you on the evening of November twenty-first of last year?”
Everyone leaned forward and drew in their breath.
“Mr. Finch,” he said, “I was goin’ home as usual that evenin’, an’ when I passed the Ewell place Miss Mayella were on the porch, like she said she were.  It seemed real quiet like, an’ I didn’t quite know why.  I was studyin’ why, just passin’ by, when she waves for me to come there and help her a minute.  Well, I went inside the fence an’ looked around for some kindlin’ to work on, but I didn’t seen none, and she says, “Naw, I got something’ for you to do in the house.  Th’ old door’s off its hinges an’ fall’s comin’ on pretty fast.’  I said, ‘You got a screwdriver, Miss Mayella?’ She said she sho’ had.  Well, I went up the steps an’ she motioned me to come inside, and I went in the front room an’ looked at the door.  I said, ‘Miss Mayella, the door look all right.  Then she shet the door in my face.  Mr. Finch, I was wonderin’ why it was so quiet like, an’ it come to me that there weren’t a chile on the place, not a one of ‘em, and I said ‘Miss Mayella, where the chillun?’  I say, ‘Where the chillun?” he continued, “an’ she says—she was laughin’, sort of – she says they all gone to town to get ice creams.  She says, ‘took me a slap year to save seb’m nickels, but I done it.  They all gone to town.’”
Tom felt uncomfortable.  “What did you say then, Tom?” asked Atticus.
“I said somethin’ like, why Miss Mayella, that’s right smart o’ you to treat ‘em.  An’ she said, ‘You think so?’  I don’t think she understood what I was thinkin’—I meant it was smart of her to save like that, an’ nice of her to treat ‘em.”
“I understand you, Tom.  Go on,” said Atticus.
“Well, I said I best be goin’, I couldn’t do nothin’ for her, an’ she says oh yes I could , an’ I ask her what, and she says to just step on that chair yonder an’ git that box down from the top of the chiffarobe.”
“Not the same chiffarobe you busted up?” asked Atticus.
“Naw suh, another one.  Most as tall as the room.  So I done what she told me, an’ I was just reachin’ when the next thing I knows she—she’d grabbed me round the legs, grabbed me round th’ legs, Mr. Finch.  She scared me so bad I hopped down an’ turned the chair over – that was the only thing, only furniture, ‘sturbed in that room, Mr. Finch, when I left it.  I swear ‘fore God.”
“What happened after you turned the chair over?”
Tom Robinson came to a dead stop.  He glanced at Atticus, then to the jury, and Mr. Underwood sitting across the room.
“Tom you’re sworn to tell the whole truth.  Will you tell it?”
Tom ran his hand nervously over his mouth.
“What happened after that?”
“Answer the question,” said Judge Taylor.
“Mr. Finch, I got down offa that chair an’ turned around an’ she sorta jumped on me.”
“Jumped on you? Violently?”
“No suh, she—she hugged. Me.  She hugged me round the waist.”
The crowed got loud again and Judge Taylor used his gavel to get order.
“Then what did she do?”
“She reached up an’ kissed me ‘side of th’ face.  She says she never kissed a grown man before an’ she might as well kiss a n****r.  She says what her papa do to her don’t count.  She says, ‘Kiss me back, n****r.’ I say, ‘Miss Mayella lemme outta here’ an’ tried to run but she got her back to the door an’ I’da had to push her.  I didn’t wanta harm her, Mr. Finch, an’ I say lemme pass, but just when I say it Mr. Ewell yonder hollered through th’ window.”
“What did he say?”
Tom Robinson swallowed again and his eyes widened.  “Somethin’ not fittin’ to say—not fittin’ for these folks ‘n chillun to hear—“
“What did he say, Tom?  You must tell the jury what he said.”
Tom Robinson shut his eyes tight.  “He says you goddamn whore, I’ll kill ya.”
“Then what happened?”
“Mr. Finch, I was runnin’ so fast I didn’t know what happened.”
“Tom, did you rape Mayella Ewell?”
“I did not, suh.”
“Did you harm her in any way?”
“I did not, suh.”
“Did you resist her advances?”
“Mr. Finch, I tried.  I tried to ‘thout bein’ ugly to her.  I didn’t wanta be ugly, I didn’t wanta push her or nothin’.”
It occurred to me that Tom Robinson’s manners were as good as Atticus’s in their own way.  I did not understand Tom’s situation: he would not have dared strike a white woman under any circumstances and expect to live long, so he took the first opportunity to run which made him look like he was guilty.
“Tom, go back once more to Mr. Ewell,” said Atticus.  “Did he say anything to you?”
“Not anything, suh.  He mighta said somethin’, but I weren’t there—“
“That’ll do,” Atticus cut in sharply.  “What you did hear, who was he talking to?”
“Mr. Finch, he were talkin’ and lookin’ at Miss Mayella.”
“Then you ran?”
“I sho’ did, suh.”
“Why did you run?”
“I was scared, suh.”
“Why were you scared?”
“Mr. Finch, if you was a n****r like me, you’d be scared, too.”
Mr. Link Deas stood up from his seat in the courtroom and announced,  “I just want the whole lot of you to know one thing right now.  That boy’s worked for me eight years an’ I ain’t had a speck o’ trouble outta him.  Not a speck.”
“Shut your mouth, sir!”  Judge Taylor roared.  “Link Deas, if you have anything you want to say, you can say it under oath and at the proper time, but until then you get out of this room, you hear me?  Get out of this room, sir, you hear me?  I’ll be damned if I’ll listen to this case again!”
Judge Taylor told the reporter to take out what Link had said and told the jury to disregard the interruption.
It was now Mr. Gilmer’s turn to ask Tom questions.
“You were given thirty days once for disorderly conduct, Robinson?” asked Mr. Gilmer.
“Yes, suh.”
“What’d the n****r look like when you got through with him?”
“He beat me, Mr. Gilmer.”
“Yes, but you were convicted, weren’t you?”
Atticus spoke up and sounded tired.  “It was a misdemeanor and it’s in the record, Judge.”
“Witness’ll answer, though” said Judge Taylor just as wearily.
“Yes, suh, I got thirty days.”
Mr. Gilmer was letting the jury know that a man who was convicted of disorderly conduct could easily have taken advantage of Mayella Ewell.
“Robinson, you’re pretty good at busting up chiffarobes and kindling with one hand, aren’t you?”
“Yes suh, I reckon so.”
“Strong enough to coke the breath out of a woman and sling her to the floor?”
“I never done that, suh.”
“But you are strong enough to?”
“I reckon so, suh.”
“Had your eye on her a long time, hadn’t you, boy?”
“No suh, I never looked at her.”
“Then you were mighty polite to do all that chopping and hauling for her, weren’t you, boy?”
“I was just tryin’ to help her out, suh.”
“That was mighty generous of you, you had chores at home after your regular work, didn’t you?”
“Yes, suh.”
“Why didn’t you do them instead of Miss Ewell’s?”
“I done ‘em both suh.”
“You must have been pretty busy.  Why?”
“Why what, suh?”
“Why were you so anxious to do that woman’s chores?”
“Looked like she didn’t have nobody to help her, like I says—“
“With Mr. Ewell and seven children on the place, boy?”
“Well, I says it looked like they never help her none—“
“You did all this chopping and work from sheer goodness, boy?”
“Tried to help her, I says.”
Mr. Gilmer smiled grimly at the jury.  “Youre a mighty good fellos, it seems – did all this for not one penny?”
“Yes, suh.  I felt right sorry for her, she seemed to try more’n the rest of ‘em—“
“You felt sorry for her? You felt sorry for her??” Mr. Gilmer asked, shocked.
Tom realized his mistake but the damage was done.  Mr. Gilmer paused awhile and let what was said sink in.  
“Now you went by the house as usual, last November twenty-first,” he said, “and she asked you to come in and bust up a chiffarobe, is that right?”
“No, suh, it ain’t.”
“Then you say she’s lying, boy?”
Atticus was on his feet to say something but Tom didn’t need him and said, “I don’t say she’s lyin’, Mr. Gilmer, I say she’s mistaken in her mind.”
“Didn’t Mr. Ewell run you off the place, boy?”
“No suh, I don’t’ think he did.”
“Don’t think… what do you mean?”
“I mean I didn’t stay long enough for him to run me off.”
“You’re very candid about this, why did you run so fast?”
“I says I was scared, suh.”
“If you had a clear conscience, why were you scared?”
“Like I says before, it weren’t safe for any n****r to be in a – fix like that.”
“But you weren’t in a fix – you testified that you were resisting Miss Ewell.  Were you so scared that she’d hurt you, you ran, a big buck like you?”
“No suh, scared to be in court, just like I am now.”
“Scared of arrest, scared you’d have to face up to what you did?”
“No suh, scared I’d hafta face up to what I didn’t do.”
“Are you being impudent to me, boy?”
“No suh, I didn’t go to be.”
I didn’t hear anymore because I had to take Dill out of the courtroom.  He had started to cry and couldn’t stop.  Jem said if I didn’t go with him he’d make me.  Reverend Sykes said I ought to take him out too.
“Ain’t you feeling good?” I asked.
Dill tried to pull himself together.  Mr. Link Deas was on the top step of the courthouse. 
“Anything happenin’, Scout?” he asked as we went by.
“No sir,” I answered.  “Dill here, he’s sick.”
We went to sit under the shade of the tree.  Dill said, “It was just him I couldn’t stand.”
“Who? Tom?”
“That old Mr. Gilmer doin’ him thataway, talking so hateful to him—“
“Dill, that’s his job.  Why, if we didn’t have prosecutors—well, we couldn’t have defense attorneys, I reckon.”
“I know all that, Scout.  It was the way he said it made me sick, plain sick.”
“He’s suppose to act that way, Dill, he was cross –“
“He didn’t act that way when –“
“Dill, those were his own witnesses.”
“Well, Mr. Finch didn’t act that way to Mayella and old man Ewell when he cross-examined them.  The way that man called him ‘boy’ all the time an’ sneered at him, an’ looked around at the jury every time he answered –“
“Well, Dill, after all he’s just a Negro.”
“I don’t care one speck. It ain’t right, somehow it ain’t right to do ‘em that way.  Hasn’t anybody got any business talkin’ like that – it just makes me sick.” 
“That’s just Mr. Gilmer’s way, Dill, he does ‘em all that way.  You’ve never seen him get good’n down on one yet.  Why, when – well, today Mr. Gilmer seemed to me like he wasn’t half trying.  They do ‘em all that way, most lawyers, I mean.”
“Mr. Finch doesn’t.”
“He’s not an example, Dill, he’s… he’s the same in the courtroom as he is on the public streets.”
“That’s not what I mean,” said Dill.
“I know what you mean, boy,” said a voice behind us.  It was Mr. Dolphus Raymond.  He peered around the trunk of the tree at us.  
“You aren’t think-hided, it just makes you sick, doesn’t it?”

 
Chapter 20

	Mr. Dolphus Raymond, the man who lives with a black woman and has mixed children, offered Dill a sip of his drink to settle his stomach.  I said, “Dill, you watch out, now,” because I knew Mr. Raymond drank alcohol out of that bottle in the brown paper bag.  
	Dill let go of the straw and said, “Scout, it’s nothing but Coca-Cola!”
	Mr. Raymond leaned up against the tree-trunk.  “You little folks won’t tell on me now, will you?  It’d ruin my reputation if you did.”
	“You mean all you drink in that sack’s Co-Cola?  Just plain Co-Cola?”
	“Yes, ma’am,” Mr. Raymond nodded.  I liked his smell: it was of leather, horses, and cottonseed.  He wore the only English riding boots I had ever seen.  “That’s all I drink, most of the time.”
	“Then you just pretend to be drunk?  Why?”
	“Well,” Mr. Raymond said, “Some folks don’t like that I lie with a black woman since I’m white.  So even though I don’t care what they think, I try to give ‘em a reason.  It helps folks if they can latch onto a reason.  When I come to town, which is seldom, if I weave a little and drink out of this sack, folks can say Dolphus Raymond is drunk on whiskey – and that’s why he won’t change his ways.  He can’t help himself, that’s why he lives the way he does.”
	I told Mr. Raymond, “That ain’t honest, making yourself out badder than you already –“
	“It ain’t honest but it’s mighty helpful to folks.  Secretly, Scout, I’m not much of a drinker, but you see they could never, ever understand that I live like I do because that’s the way I want to live.”
	Mr. Raymond also said, “Dill was crying and feeling sick about the racism he saw in that courtroom.  But when he gets older he won’t cry anymore.”

	Jem, Dill and I went back into the courtroom in time to hear Atticus’s closing statement.  He was telling the jury… “Gentlemen, I remind you that this is a simple case.  If you convict Tom Robinson, you must be sure beyond all reasonable doubt that he is guilty.  This case should never have even come to trial.  This case is as simple as black and white.”  I noticed Atticus was sweating.  
	“The state has not produced any evidence that Mayella was ever raped.  Their two witnesses, Mayella and Bob Ewell, didn’t have their stories straight.  The defendant is not guilty, but somebody in this courtroom is.  I have pity for Mayella, but she has accused an innocent man to get rid of her own guilt.  She feels guilt because she liked a black man and tried to kiss him.  Our society does not allow this.  Now she seeks to destroy him so that she doesn’t have to face her own guilt.  She must destroy the evidence of her offense.  Tom did not rape Mayella.  All he did was try to get away when she kissed him.  Don’t let your prejudices get the better of you and make you think he’s guilty just because he’s black.”
	As Atticus finished his speech we saw Calpurnia making her way up the middle aisle of the courtroom, walking straight toward Atticus.

 
Chapter 21

	Calpurnia stopped shyly at the railing and waited for Judge Taylor’s attention.
	He saw her and said, “It’s Calpurnia, isn’t it?”
	“Yes, sir,” she said.  “Could I just pass this note to Mr. Finch, please sir?  It hasn’t got anything to do with – with the trial.”
	Atticus read the note and it was from Aunt Alexandra.  It said that his children were missing.
	Mr. Underwood spoke up and said, “I know where they are, Atticus.  They’re right up yonder in the colored balcony – been there since precisely one-eighteen p.m.”
	Our father said, “Jem, come down from there.”  We made our way down the balcony.  Atticus and Calpurnia met us at the bottom.
	Jem was jumping with excitement.  “We’ve won, haven’t we?”
	“I’ve no idea,” said Atticus shortly.  “You’ve been here all afternoon?  Go home with Calplurnia and get your supper – and stay home.”
	“Aw, Atticus, let us come back,” pleaded Jem.  “Please let us hear the verdict, please sir.”
	“The jury might be out and back in a minute, we don’t know.  Well, you’ve heard it all, so you might as well hear the rest.  Tell you what, you all can come back when you’ve eaten your supper – eat slowly, now, you won’t miss anything important – and if the jury’s still out, you can wait with us.  But I expect it’ll be over before you get back.”
	“You think they’ll acquit him that fast?” asked Jem.
	Atticus opened his mouth to say something and closed it again.
	Calpurnia marched us home and was very angry with us.  She was upset that we were missing and that we were at the trial listening to all that was going on.  She didn’t think it was fitting for children to hear.
	“Mister Jem, I thought you was getting’ some kinda head on your shoulders – the very idea– she’s your little sister!  The very idea, sir!  You oughta be perfectly ashamed of yourself – ain’t you got any sense at all”
	Jem was chuckling, “Don’t you want to hear about it, Cal?”
	“Hush your mouth, sir!  When you oughta be hangin’ your head in shame you go along laughin’ –“ Calpurnia scolded.
	Jem was still grinning.  Calpurnia agreed that we could have Dill over for supper.
	Aunt Alexandra met us and almost fainted when Calpurnia told her where we were.
	Reverend Sykes had saved our places.  We were surprised to see that we had been gone an hour.
	“Nobody’s moved hardly,” said Jem.
	The jury had been out for about thirty minutes.
	Jem smiled, “Don’t fret, we’ve won it,” he said wisely.  “Don’t see how any jury could convict on what we heard –“
	“Now don’t you be so confident, Mr. Jem,” warned the Reverend.  “I ain’t never seen any jury decide in favor of a colored man over a white man…”
	Jem spoke for awhile on his ideas on the law regarding rape.  Time had passed and it was getting close to eight.  Atticus was walking around the jury box area and Mr. Gilmer was standing at the windows talking to Mr. Underwood.  The courtroom was so still. 
	I was past tired.  When the clock had bonged eleven times, I allowed myself a short nap.  I jerked awake and made an effort to remain so.  I looked around and saw the people sitting below.  Dill was sound asleep, his head on Jem’s shoulder and Jem was quiet.  The courtoom reminded me of the day when Atticus shot the rabid dog.
	Mr. Heck Tate came in and said,” This court will come to order,” in a voice that rang with authority.  Mr. Heck Tate left the room and returned with Tom Robinson.
	What happened after that had a dreamlike quality: in a dream I saw the jury return, moving like underwater swimmers, and Judge Taylor’s voice came form far away and was tiny.
	A jury never looks at a defendant it has convicted, and when this jury came in, not one of them looked at Tom Robinson.  The foreman handed a piece of paper to the judge.
	I shut my eyes.  Judge Taylor was poling the jury:  “Guilty… guilty…guilty…”  I peeked at Jem and his hands were white from gripping the balcony rail, and his shoulders jerked as if each “guilty” were a separate stab between them.
	Someone was punching me, but I was reluctant to take my eyes from the people below us and from the image of Atticus’s lonely walk down the aisle.
	“Miss Jean Louise?”
	I looked.  All around us and in the balcony on the opposite wall, the Negroes were getting to their feet.  Reverend Sykes’s voice was as distant as Judge Taylor’s:  
	“Miss Jean Louise, stand up.  Your father’s passin’.”

 
Chapter 22

	When we left the courthouse, Jem started to cry.  His face was streaked with angry tears as we made our way through the cheerful crowd.  “It ain’t right,” he muttered, all the way to the corner of the square where we found Atticus waiting for us.  Atticus was standing under the street light looking as though nothing had happened:  his vest was buttoned, his collar and tie were neatly in place, his watch-chain glistened, he was his impassive self again.  
	“It ain’t right, Atticus,” said Jem.
	“No, son, it’s not right.”
	“How could they do it, how could they convict Tom if he didn’t do it?”
	“I don’t know, son, but they did it.  They’ve done it before and they did it tonight and they’ll do it again and when they do it – seems that only children weep.”
	The next morning, Calpurnia showed Atticus that the black community had brought all sorts of food for the Finch family.  The kitchen table was loaded with enough food to bury the family:  hunks of salt pork, tomatoes, beans, even scuppernongs.  Atticus grinned when he found a jar of pickled pigs’ knuckles.  Calpurnia said, “This was all ‘round the back steps when I got here this morning.  They – they ‘preciate what you did, Mr. Finch.  They – they aren’t oversteppin’ themselves, are they?”
	Atticus’s eyes filled with tears. He did not speak for a moment.  “Tell them I’m very grateful,” he said.  “Tell them – tell them they must never do this again.  Times are too hard..”
	Later that day Jem, Dill and I went over to talk to Miss Maudie about everything.  She said, “You’d be surprised how many people care about Tom.  Judge Taylor cares, for example.  Did it ever strike you that Judge Taylor naming Atticus to defend that boy was no accident?  That Judge Taylor might have had his reasons for naming him?”
	Miss Maudie had a good point.  Usually Maxwell Green is the lawyer to do these kinds of trials.  But he’s not very good.  So Judge Taylor must have appointed Atticus because he wanted Tom to have a good defense and a fair trial.
	When we got home, Aunt Alexandra came to the door and called us, but she was too late.  It was Miss Stephanie’s pleasure to tell us:  this morning, Mr. Bob Ewell stopped Atticus on the post office corner, spat in his face, and told him he’d get him if it took the rest of this life.

 
Chapter 23
	“I wish Bob Ewell wouldn’t chew tobacco,” was all Atticus said about it.
	According to Miss Stephanie Crawford, however, Atticus was leaving the post office when Mr. Ewell approached him, cursed him, spat on him, and threatened to kill him.  Miss Stephanie said Atticus didn’t bat an eye, just took out his handkerchief and wiped his face and stood there and let Mr. Ewell call him names wild horses could not bring her to repeat.  So Mr. Ewell said, “Too proud to fight, you n****r-lovin’ bastard?”  And Atticus replied, “No, too old,” put his hands in his pockets and strolled on.
	A few days later, Atticus noticed that Jem and I were really worried because Bob Ewell had threatened to kill Atticus.  He told Jem, “Jem, see if you can stand in Bob Ewell’s shoes a minute.  I destroyed his last shred of credibility at that trial, if he had any to begin with.  The man had to have some kind of comeback, his kind always does.  So if spitting in my face and threatening me saved Mayella Ewell one extra beating, that’s something I’ll gladly take.  He had to take it out on somebody and I’d rather it be me than that houseful of children out there.  You understand?”
	After that, we were not afraid.  Atticus also told us that nothing would happen to Tom Robinson until the higher court reviewed his case, and that Tom had a good chance of going free, or at least of having a new trial.  He was at Enfield Prison Farm, seventy miles away in Chester County.  I asked Atticus if Tom’s wife and children were allowed to visit him, but Atticus said no.  “If he loses his appeal,” I asked one evening, “what’ll happen to him?”
	“He’ll go to the electric chair,” said Atticus, “unless the Governor commutes his sentence.  Not time to worry yet, Scout.  We’ve got a good chance.”
	“Tom’s jury sure made up its mind in a hurry,” Jem muttered.
	Atticus’s fingers went to his watchpocket.  “No it didn’t,” he said, more to himself than to us.  “That was the one thing that made me think, well, this may be the shadow of a beginning.  That jury took a few hours.  An inevitable verdict, maybe, but usually it takes ‘em just a few minutes.  You might like to know that there was one fellow who took considerable wearing down – in the beginning he was wanting to set Tom free.”
	“Who?” Jem was astonished.
	Atticus’s eyes twinkled.  “It’s not for me to say, but I’ll tell you this much.  He was one of your Old Sarum friends…”
	“One of the Cunninghams?”  Jem yelped.  “One of – I didnt’ recognize any of ‘em… you’re jokin’.”
	“One of their connections.  On a hunch, I didn’t dismiss him from the jury even though I could have.”
	“Golly Moses,” Jem said reverently.  “One minute they’re tryin’ to kill Tom and the next they’re tryin’ to turn him loose… I’ll never understand those folks as long as I live.”
	After Atticus left the room, I decided that I would be nice to Water Cunningham from now on since his someone in his family had been on the jury and wanted to set Tom free.  I even said that I would invite him over to spend the night some time.
	“We’ll see about that,” Aunt Alexandra said.
	Surprised, I turned to her. “Why not, Aunty? They’re good folks.”
	She looked at me over her sewing glasses.  “Jean Louise, there is no doubt in my mind that they’re good folks.  But they’re not our kind of folks.  You can scrub Walter Cunningham till he shines, you can put him in shoes and a new suit, but he’ll never be like Jem.  Besides, there’s a drinking streak in that family a mile wide.  Finch women aren’t interested in that sort of people.”
	“If they’re good folks, then why can’t I be nice to Walter?”
	“I didn’t say not to be nice to him.  You should be friendly and polite to him, you should be gracious to everybody, dear.  But you don’t have to invite him home.”
	“But I want to play with Walter, Aunty, why can’t I?”
	She took off her glasses and stared at me.  “I’ll tell you why,” she said.  “Because – he—is—trash, that’s why you can’t play with him.  I’ll not have you around him, picking up his habits and learning Lord-knows-what.  You’re enough of a problem to your father as it is.”
	I was so angry and upset, but Jem put his arm around me and led me, sobbing in fury, to his room.  He told me that Aunty was trying to make me into a lady and told me I should take up sewing or something.
	I told Jem that I was so upset that Aunty called Walter Cunningham trash.  “But Walter isn’t trash.  He ain’t like the Ewells,” I told Jem.
	“You know something, Scout?  I’ve got it all figured out, now.  I’ve thought about it a lot lately and I’ve got it figured out.  There’s four kinds of folks in the world.  There’s the ordinary kind like us and the neighbors, there’s the kind like the Cunninghams out in the woods, the kind like the Ewells down at the dump, and the Negroes.  Our kind of folks don’t like the Cunninghams, the Cunninghams don’t like the Ewells, and the Ewells hate and despise the colored folks.  Background means that a family has been reading and writing for a long time.”
	“I don’t’ think that’s what background is, Jem.  Everybody’s gotta learn, nobody’s born knowin’.  That Walter’s as smart as he can be, he just gets held back sometimes because he has to stay out and help his daddy.  Nothin’s wrong with him.  Naw, Jem, I think there’s just one kind of folks.  Folks.”
	Jem said, “That’s what I thought too, when I was your age.  If there’s just one kind of folks, why can’t they get along with each other?  If they’re all alike, why do they go out of their way to despise each other?  Scout, I think I’m beginning to understand something.  I think I’m beginning to understand why Boo Radley’s stayed shut up in the house all this time… it’s because he wants to stay inside.

 
Chapter 24

	It was on the brink of September and Dill would be leaving tomorrow.  He was off with Jem swimming.  They said they were going in naked and I couldn’t come, so I divided my time between Calpurnia and Miss Maudie.
	Today Aunt Alexandra was having the ladies over.  After they talked, they were going to have refreshments.  Aunt Alexandra told me to join them for refreshments.  I didn’t know if I should go into the dining room or stay out.  I was wearing my pink Sunday dress, shoes and a petticoat.  Since Aunty let Calpurnia serve them today, I thought if I spilled something on my dress Calpurnia would have to wash it out before tomorrow.  I didn’t want to give her anymore work today.
	“Can I help you, Cal?” I asked, wishing to be of some service.
	“You be still as a mouse in that corner,” she said, “an‘ you can help me load up the trays when I come back.”
	I helped Calplurnia carry in the coffee pot and did not spill a thing.  Aunt Alexandra smiled brilliantly.  “Stay with us, Jean Louise,” she said.  This was all her campaign to teach me to be a lady.  I sat next to Miss Maudie.  I tightly gripped the sides of the chair and waited for someone to speak to me.
	“You’re mighty dressed up, Miss Jean Louise,” Miss Maudie said, “Where are your britches today?”
	“Under my dress.”
	I hadn’t meant it to be funny, but the ladies laughed.  My cheeks grew hot as I realized my mistake, but Miss Maudie looked gravely down at me.  She never laughed at me unless I meant it to be funny.
	Miss Stephanie Crawford called from across the room, “Whatcha going to be when you grow up, Jean Louise?  A lawyer?”
	I said no.  But I hadn’t really thought about it.
	I asked Mrs. Merriweather who was sitting to my right about what they had been talking about before I came in.  She filled me in on how she had been out to visit a family who was living in sin and squalor.  She told me how fortunate I was to live in a good Christian family with Christian folks in a Christian town.
	The conversation then turned toward Tom Robinson’s wife.  Mrs. Merriweather continued, “there’s one thing I truly believe, Gertrude,” she continued, “but some people just don’t see it my way.  If we just let then know we forgive ‘em, that we’ve forgotten it, then this whole thing’ll blow over.”
	“Ah – Mrs. Merriweather,” I interrupted once more, “what’ll blow over?”
	“Nothing, Jean Louise,” she said, “the cooks and field hands are just dissatisfied, but they’re settling down now – they grumbled all next day after that trial.”  She paused and turned to another woman in the group, “Gertrude, I tell you there’s nothing more distracting than a sulky darky.  Their mouths go down to here.  Just ruins your day to have one of ‘em in the kitchen.”
	Another lady said,  “Looks like we’re fightin’ a losing battle, a losing battle… it doesn’t matter to ‘em one bit.  We can educate ‘em till we’re blue in the face, we can try till we drop to make Christians out of ‘em, but there’s no lady safe in her bed these nights.”
	I had lost interest in the conversation when they quit talking about Tom Robinson’s wife.
	Mrs. Merriweather spoke up again.  “Northerners are hypocrites… at least we don’t have that sin on our shoulders down here.  People up there set ‘em free, but you don’t see ‘em settin’ at the table with ‘em.  At least we don’t have the deceit to say to ‘em yes, you’re as good as we are but stay away from us.  Down here we just say you live your way and we’ll live ours.  I think that woman, that Mrs. Roosevelt’s lost her mind – just plain lost her mind coming down to Birmingham and tryin’ to sit with ‘em.  If I was the Mayor of Birmingham I’d –“
	I was thinking if I was the Governor of Alabama I’d let Tom Robinson go so quick.  I heard Calpurnia talking about how bad it was going for Tom.  He said that there wasn’t a thingt Atticus could do to make being shut up easier for him.  The last thing he had said to Atticus the day before he was taken to the prison camp was, “Good-bye, Mr. Finch, there ain’t nothin’ you can do now, so there ain’t no use tryin’.”  He had just given up hope.
	Atticus came in the door and his face was white.  He apologized for the interruption and asked if he could speak with Alexandra.  He wanted to borrow Calpurnia for a while.
	“Cal,” Atticus said, “I want you to go with me out to Helen Robinson’s house—“
	“What’s the matter?” Aunt Alexandra said, alarmed by the look on my father’s face.
	“Tom’s dead.”
	Aunt Alexandra put her hand to her mouth.
	“They shot him” said Atticus.  “He was running.  It was during their exercise period.  They said he just broke into a blind raving charge at the fence and started climbing over.  Right in front of them—“
	“Didn’t they try to stop him?  Didn’t they give him any warning?” Aunt Alexandtra’s voice shook.
	“Oh, yes, the guards called to him to stop.  They fired a few shots in the air, then to kill.  They got him just as he went over the fence.  They said if he’s had two good arms he’d have made it, he was moving that fast.  Seventeen bullet holes in him.  They didn’t have to shoot him that much.  Cal I want you to come out with me and help me tell Helen.”
	“Yes sir,” she murmured, fumbling with her apron.  Miss Maudie went to Calpurnia and untied it.
	“This is the last straw, Atticus,” Aunt Alexandra said.
	“Depends on how you look at it,” he said.  “What was one Negro, more or less, among two hundred of ‘em?  He wasn’t Tom to them, he was an escaping prisoner.  We had a good chance,” he said.  “ I told him what I thought, but I couldn’t in truth say that we had more than a good chance.  I guess Tom was tired of white men’s chances and preferred to take his own.  Ready, Cal?”
	“Yessir, Mr. Finch.”
	“Then let’s go.”
	Aunt Alexandra sat down in the chair and put her hands to her face.  I thought she was crying.  When she took her hands away she wasn’t but she looked weary.  I heard Miss Maudie breathing heavily and heard the ladies in the other room chatting happily.
	“I can’t say I approve of everything he does, Maudie, but he’s my brother, and I just want him to know when this will ever end.  It tears him to pieces.  He doesn’t show it much, but it tears him to pieces.  I’ve seen him when – what else do they want from him, Maudie, what else?”
	“What does who want, Alexandra?”  Miss Maudie asked.
	“I mean this town.  They’re perfectly willing to let him wreck his health doing what they’re afraid to do, they’re –“
	“Be quiet, they’ll hear you,” said Miss Maudie.  “Have you ever thought of it this way, Alexandra?  Whether Maycomb knows it or not, we’re paying the highest tribute we can pay a man.   We trust him to do right.  It’s that simple.”
	“Who?”
	“The handful of people in this town who say that fair play is not marked White Only; the handful of people who say a fair trial is for everybody, not just us; the handful of people with enough humility to think when they look at a Negro, there but for the Lord’s kindness am I… The handful of people in this town with background, that’s who they are.”
	I was shaking and Miss Maudie told me to stop and she also told Aunt Alexandra to get up because we had left the ladies too long already.
	“Are you together again, Jean Louise?”  Miss Maudie asked.
	“Yes ma’am.”
	“Then let’s join the ladies.”
	We all went in and Aunt Alexandra refilled coffee cups and dished out goodies.  The conversation resumed with the Christian works they had done.
	Aunt Alexandra looked across the room at me and smiled. She looked at a tray of cookies on the table and nodded at them.  I carefully picked up the tray and watched myself walk to Mrs. Merriweather.  With my best company manners, I asked her if she would have some.
	After all, if Aunty could be a lady at a time like this, so could I.

 
Chapter 25

	September had come, but not a trace of cool weather with it, and we were still sleeping on the back screen porch.  A roly poly insect had crawled onto the porch.  Jem was scowling when I went to mash it.  This was probably a part of the stage he was going through, and I wished he would hurry up and get through it.
	“Why couldn’t’ I mash him?” I asked.
	“Because they don’t bother you,” Jem answered in the darkness.
	“Reckon you’re at the stage now where you don’t kill flies and mosquitoes now, I reckon,” I said.  “Lemme know when you change your mind.  Tell you one thing though, I ain’t gonna sit around and not scratch a redbug.”
	“Aw, dry up,” he answered drowsily.
	Jem was the one who was getting more like a girl every day, not I.  I was thinking of Dill.  He had left us the first of the month saying that he would be back the minute school was out.  Dill told me of the time he and Jem were swimming and on their way back, they saw Atticus driving up the road.  He stopped and Jem pleaded for a ride.  Atticus finally agreed.  He and Calpurnia were on their way to Tom Robinson’s place.
	They turned off the highway, rode slowly by the dump and past the Ewell residence, down the narrow lane to the Negro cabins.  Dill said a crowd of black children were playing marbles in Tom’s front yard.  Atticus parked the car and got out.  Calpurnia followed him through the front gate.
	Dill heard him ask one of the children, “Where’s your mother, Sam?” and heard Sam say, “She down at Sis Steven’s, Mr. Finch.  Want me run fetch her?”
	Dill said Atticus looked uncertain, then he said yes, and Sam scampered off.  “Go on with your game, boys,”  Atticus said to the children.
	A little girl came to the door and she needed some help getting up the steps.  Dill said that Atticus offered her his finger to help her and then gave her over to Calpurnia.
	Sam was trotting behind his mother when they came up.  Dill said Helen said, “’Evenin’, Mr. Finch, won’t you have a seat?”  But she didn’t say anymore.  Neither did Atticus.
	“Scout,” said Dill, “she just fell down in the dirt.  Just fell down in the dirt, like a giant with a big foot just came along and stepped on her.  Just ump—“  Dill’s fat foot hit the ground.  “Like you’d step on an ant.”
	Dill said Calpurnia and Atticus lifted Helen to her feet and half carried, half walked her to the cabin.  They stayed inside a long time, and Atticus came out alone.  When they drove back by the dump, some of the Ewells hollered at them, but Dill didn’t catch what they said.
	Maycomb was interested by the news of Tom’s death for perhaps two days.  To Maycomb, Tom’s death was typical.  Typical for a n****r to cut and run.  Typical of a n****’s mentality to have no plan, no thought for the future, just run blind first chance he saw.  Funny thing, Atticus Finch might’ve got him off scot free, but wait --? Hell no.  You know how they are. Easy come, easy go.  Just shows you that Robinson was legally married, they say he kept himself clean, went to church and all that, but when it comes down to the line, the n****r always comes out in ‘em.
	The Maycomb Tribune appeared the following Thursday.  There was a brief obituary, but there was also an editorial.
	Mr. Underwood was at this most bitter, and he couldn’t care less who cancelled advertising and subscriptions as a result of his editorial.  He didn’t write about the injustices, he was writing so children could understand.  Mr. Underwood simply figured it was a sin to kill cripples, be they standing, sitting, or escaping.  He likened Tom’s death to the senseless slaughter of songbirds by hunters and children.
	How could this be so, I wondered, as I read Mr. Underwood’s editorial.  Senseless killing – Tom had been given due process of law to the day of this death; he had been tried openly and convicted by twelve good men and true; my father had fought for him all the way.  Then Mr. Underwood’s meaning became clear:  Atticus had used every tool available to free men to save Tom Robinson, but in the secret courts of men’s hearts, Atticus had no case. Tom was a dead man the minute Mayella Ewell opened her mouth and screamed.
	The name Ewell gave me a queasy feeling.  Mr. Ewell said it made one down and about two more to go.  Jem told me not to be afraid, Mr. Ewell was more hot gas than anything.  Jem also told me that if I breathed a word to Atticus, if in anyway I let Atticus know I knew, Jem would personally never speak to me again.

 
Chapter 26

	School started, and so did our daily trips past the Radley Place.  Jem was in the seventh grade now and went to high school, beyond the grammar-school building; I was now in the third grade, and our routines were so different I only walked to school with Jem in the mornings and saw him at mealtimes.
	The Radley Place didn’t terrify me anymore.  I sometimes felt a bit of remorse, when passing by the old place, at ever having taken part in what must have been sheer torment to Arthur Radley – what reasonable recluse wants children peeping through his shutters, delivering greetings on the end of a fishing-pole, wandering in his collards at night?
	And yet I remembered.  Two Indian-head pennies, chewing gum, soap dolls, a rusty medal, a broken watch and chain.  Jem must have put them away somewhere.  I stopped and looked at the tree one afternoon: the trunk was swelling around its cement patch.  The patch itself was turning yellow.
	I still looked for Boo each time I went by.  Maybe someday we would see him.  I imagined how it would be: when it happened, he’d just be sitting in the swing when I came along.  “Hidy do, Mr. Arthur,” I would say, as if I had said it every afternoon of my life.  
“Evening, Jean Louise,” he would say, as if he had said it every afternoon of my life, “Right pretty spell we’re having, isn’t it?”  
“Yes, sir, right pretty” I would say, and go on.  It was only a fantasy though.  We would never see him.
	One night when I told Atticus that I wanted to see Boo Radley someday, he said “Don’t start with that again, Scout.  I’m too old to go chasing you off the Radley property.  Besides, it’s dangerous.  You might get shot.  You know, Mr. Nathan shoots at every shadow he sees, even shadows that leave size-four bare footprints.  You were lucky not to be killed.”
	I couldn’t believe it!  Atticus KNEW it was US that Mr. Radley shot at that night!  This was the first time he had let us know that he knew a lot more about something than we thought he knew.
	One day in school, Cecil Jacobs presented a current event about Adolf Hitler.  He presented the news article to the class. “Adolf Hitler has been after the Jews and he’s puttin’ ‘em in prisons and he’s taking away all their property and he won’t let any of ‘em out of the country…”
	A student in the back of the room asked, “How can he do that?”
	“Who do what?” asked Miss Gates, our teacher, patiently.
	“I mean how can Hitler just put a lot of folks in a pen like that, looks like the government’d stop him,” said the student.
	“Hitler is the government,” said Miss Gates.  She went to the blackboard and printed the work DEMOCRACY in large letters.  “Democracy,” she said.  “Does anybody have a definition?”
	I raised my hand and said, “Equal rights for all, special privileges for none.”
	“Very good, Jean Louise, very good,” Miss Gates smiled. In front of “DEMOCRACY”, she printed “WE ARE A”.  “Now class, say it all together, ‘We are a democracy.’”
	We said it.  Then Miss Gates said, “That’s the difference between America and Germany.  We are a democracy and Germany is a dictatorship.  Over there we don’t believe in persecuting anybody.  Persecution comes from people who are prejudiced.  Prejudice,” she said carefully.  “There are no better people in the world than the Jews, and why Hitler doesn’t think so is a mystery to me.”
	I went home later that day and asked Atticus if it was okay to hate Hitler.
	“It is not,” he said. “it’s not okay to hate anybody.”
	I was still confused about things so I went to see Jem.  I said, “Jem, coming out of the courthouse that night Miss Gates was – she was goin’ down the steps in front of us, you must not of seen her – she was talking with Miss Stephanie Crawford.  I heard her say it’s time somebody taught ‘em a lesson, they were gettin’ way above themselves, and the next thing they think they can do is marry us.  She was talking about the black folks.  Jem , how can she say she hates Hitler so bad and then turn around and be ugly about folks right here at home?”
	Jem was suddenly furious.  He leaped off the bed, grabbed me by the collar and shook me.  “I never wanta hear about that courthouse again, ever, ever, you hear me?  You hear me?  Don’t’ you ever say one word to me about it again, you hear?  Now go on!”
	I was too surprised to cry.  I crept from Jem’s room and shut the door softly.  I found Atticus and tried to climb up in his lap.  Atticus smiled.  “You’re getting so big now, I’ll just have to hold a part of you.”  He held me close.  “Scout,” he said softly, “don’t let Jem get you down.  He’s having a rough time these days.  I heard you back there.”
	Atticus said that Jem was trying hard to forget all the prejudice and injustice he saw at Tom’s trial.  After enough time passed, Jem would be able to make sense of it all and sort things out, but right now he was very upset.  
	
 
Chapter 27

	Something weird happened to Judge Taylor one Sunday night.  He was lost in a book when he noticed a scratching noise.  “Hush,” he said to Ann Taylor, his fat dog.  Then he realized he was speaking to an empty room; the scratching noise was coming from the rear of the house.  Judge Taylor clumped to the back porch to let Ann out and found the screen door swinging open.  A shadow on the corner of the house caught his eye, and that was all he saw of the visitor.  Mrs. Taylor came home from church to find her husband in his chair, lost in the writing of Bob Taylor, with a shotgun across his lap.  I bet that his “visitor” was Bob Ewell who was mad at him because he appointed Atticus to Tom’s case, which meant the judge wanted Tom to have a fair chance.
	Something happened to Helen Robinson too.  Mr. Link Deas, who had been Tom’s boss, created a job for Helen because he felt so badly about what happened to Tom.  Helen had to walk nearly a mile out of her way to work in order to avoid the Ewell place.  The Ewells would swear at her if she tried to use the public road that ran past their house.  When Link Deas realized that Helen was coming the long way to work, he asked her why.  He got very mad and went to the Ewell house.  He yelled out to Bob that he would have him arrested if he kept bothering Helen.  But Bob kept annoying her.  He would follow behind her saying foul, evil things.  Link Deas threatened again to have him arrested and eventually he stopped bothering her.
	Halloween was approaching, and this year we were having a pageant.  Mrs. Grace Merriweather had composed an original pageant, and I was going to be a ham.  She thought I would be adorable if some of the children were costumed to represent the county’s agricultural products:  Cecil Jacobs would be dressed up to look like a cow; Agnes Boone would make a lovely butterbean, another child would be a peanut, and on down the line.  Our only duties, as far as I could gather from our two rehearsals, were to enter from stage left as Mrs. Merriweather identified us.  When she called out “PORK”, that was my cue.
	A few hours before the pageant I practiced my part for Calpurnia in the kitchen and she said I was wonderful.  I wanted to go across the street to show Miss Maudie, but Jem said she’d probably be at the pageant anyway.
	After that, it didn’t matter whether they went or not.  Jem said he would take me. Thus began our longest journey together.

 
Chapter 28

	The weather was warm.  The wind was growing stronger and there was no moon.  As we walked Jem and I talked about ghosts.  We were near the Radley lot.  I was getting scared anyway when we someone suddenly leaped out at us.  “God almighty!” Jem yelled.
	Cecil Jacobs shrieked, “Haa gotcha!”  He was mighty proud of himself.  And he told us so as we walked the rest of the way to the school.
	The auditorium was filling up with people and backstage there were people with all sorts of costumes.  I had some time before I had to be onstage so I curled my knees up and sank down in my costume to rest.  Well, I fell asleep listening to boring Mrs. Meriweather’s long speech about Maycomb’s grand history.  I woke up suddenly to her shrieking “POOORRRKK!” and toddled as fast as I could on stage.  Apparently I was too late because she had already called me a few times.  She was mad at me for ruining her pageant.  Judge Taylor liked it though, and the audience cheered loudly for me.
	I was so embarrassed that I didn’t want to leave right away so we waited for most people to leave, then we began walking home.  It was even darker out.  Em was guiding me along since I still had my ham costume on.  At one point he squeezed the top of my costume too hard.
	“Ahhhh, Jem—“
	“Hush up, Scout.”
	“Whatcha doin’?”
	“Thought I heard something,” he whispered.  We stopped and listened.
	“Ah, it’s probably ole Cecil again, trying to scare us.”
	“It’s not that.  I hear it when we’re walkin’ along.”
	“Are you afraid?” I asked.
	“No.  Think we’re almost to the tree, be real quiet.”  It was difficult to walk in my costume and we couldn’t see anything.  I could hear someone shuffling, and someone’s pants rustling behind us.  Jem was still holding onto me.  We stopped again to listen and now someone was running towards us.
	“Run Scout!  Run!”
	Something crushed me in my costume and I fell to the ground.  I was on the ground floundering around.  I could hear scuffling, kicking sounds, and scraping.  Someone rolled against me and then Jem pulled me up.  We were nearly to the road when I felt Jem jerk backwards.  There was more scuffling and then Jem screamed.  The scuffling noises were dying but I heard someone wheezing.  I head someone moving so I asked, “Jem?”  It seemed like someone else was under the tree now.  I felt around and someone was lying there.  I began walking toward the road and I could see a man walking towards my house, carrying Jem.
	“Call Dr. Reynolds,” Atticus said sharply.  “Where’s Scout?”
	“Here she is,” Aunt Alexandra called, pulling me towards her, working me free of my mangled costume.  Then Atticus called the sheriff, Heck Tate.
	“Is Jem dead?”  I asked Aunt Alexandra.
	“No – no darling, he’s unconscious.  What happened?”
	“I don’t know.”  She left it at that and brought me some overalls to put on.
	When Dr. Reynolds arrived it took him ten forevers to finish checking on Jem, and then I asked him, ”Is Jem dead?”
	“Far from it.”  He talked while looking me over to make sure I was okay.  “He’s got a bump on the head just like yours and a broken arm.  Looks like someone tried to wring his arm off.  We can’t do much tonight except try to make him comfortable.  You don’t feel broke anywhere, do you?”  I smiled.  “Go have a look at him.”  By then Mr. Tate was there so we all went in together.
	Jem was lying on his back.  There was an ugly mark along one side of his face.  His left arm lay out form his body.
	“Jem…?”
	Atticus said, “Let’s not bother him, he needs his rest.”  I retreated from his bed.  Aunt Alexandra was in the rocking chair.  Mr. Tate stood in the doorway.  The man who brought Jem in was in the corner.
	“Heck, did you find anything out there?”  Atticus asked.
	“Sit down, Mr. Finch, he said pleasantly.  “I found Scout’s dress, some funny pieces of muddy cloth.”  He paused.  “And I found Bob Ewell on the ground – he’s dead, Mr. Finch.”

 
Chapter 29

	Aunt Alexandra stood right up and gasped.
	“Are you sure?”  Atticus said weakly.
	“He won’t hurt these children again,” Mr. Tate said.
	He turned to me.  “Scout, can you tell us what happened out there?  Did you see him following you?”
	“We started home.  It was dark.  Jem said, ‘Hush a minute.’  We thought it was Cecil Jacobs; he scared us once tonight.  I could hear the footsteps too, then.  They walked when we walked and stopped when we stopped.  When we got under the tree, all of a sudden something’ grabbed me an’ mashed my costume.  I heard them tusslin’.  Jem grabbed me and pulled me toward the road.  Some – Mr. Ewell yanked him down.  There there was a noise – Jem hollered.  Mr. Ewell was trying to squeeze me to death, I reckon… then somebody yanked Mr. Ewell down.  Jem must have got up.  Somebody was staggerin’ around and coughin’.  I thought it was Jem but it was him.”  I half pointed to the man in the corner.
	His arms were folded across his chest.  He had sickly white hands that had never seen the sun.  He face was white too; his cheeks were thin.  His gray eyes were so colorless I thought he was blind.  I gazed at him in wonder and his lips parted into a timid smile.  Our neighbor’s image blurred with my sudden tears.
	“Hey, Boo,” I said.

 
Chapter 30

	“Mr. Arthur, honey,” Atticus corrected me.  He then suggested that we go out on the porch.  I led Boo to a chair.
	Atticus rubbed his head and said, “Well Heck, it was a clear cut self-defense, Jem is almost thirteen but it will go to trial in county court.”
	“Mr. Finch – Jem didn’t stab Bob Ewell,” said Heck Tate.  “Bob Ewell fell on his knife.  He killed himself.”  Atticus looked like he didn’t believe Mr. Tate.  Mr. Tate kept glancing at Boo.  They went back and forth a few times, and they seemed to disagree. Mr. Tate told Atticus that if he told the town exactly what happened tonight the whole town would talk about it, and all the women would want to bring Boo cakes for helping Jem and me.  “To take the one man who’s done you and this town a service and draggin’ him with his shy ways into the limelight is a sin.”
	Mr. Tate stomped off the porch, and Atticus slowly turned to me.
	“Scout, Mr. Ewell fell on his knife.  Can you possibly understand?”
	I hugged him and said, “Yes,sir.  Mr. Tate was right, it’d be sort of like shootin’ a mockingbird.”
	Atticus rubbed my head and then walked across the porch to Boo.  “Thank you for my children, Arthur.”

 
Chapter 31

	Boo Radley shuffled to his feet.  He made uncertain moves.  I took him to see Jem one last time.  He leaned forward and an expression of curiousity was on his face, as though he had never seen a boy before.  His hand came down lightly on Jem’s hair.
	“Will you take me home?” he whispered. I took his arm so that it looked like he was escorting me like a lady down the walk.  When we got to his door, he gently released my hand, opened the door, and went inside.  I never saw him again.
	I turned around on his front porch and looked at the neighborhood from Boo’s view.  I thought about all of the things he might have seen:  Dill, Jem, and I getting scolded for playing near his yard: the night of the fire: Atticus shooting the dog.  He had been with us through all of it.  Atticus said you never really knew a man until you stand in his shoes.  He was right.
	As I walked home I thought about all that Jem and I had learned.  There wasn’t much left, except maybe algebra.
	Atticus was sitting up reading in Jem’s room.  I asked if I could sit with him and he agreed.  He was reading a book, so I asked him to read it aloud.  I was falling asleep so he took me to my room.  I told him the story was good, but the man in the story was misunderstood.  People thought he was bad. But when they finally saw him “he hadn’t done anything… he was real nice.”
	“Most people are Scout, when you finally see them.”
	He tucked the covers under my chin, turned out the light , and went into Jem’s room.  He would be there all night, and when Jem woke up in the morning.
	
	





	






	
	
	






</doc>
